A Handbook of Mathematical
Discourse
Version 0.9
Charles Wells
April 25, 2002

Charles Wells
Professor Emeritus of Mathematics, Case Western Reserve University
Aﬃliate Scholar, Oberlin College
Address: 105 South Cedar Street
Oberlin, OH 44074, USA Email: charles@freude.com
Website: http://www.cwru.edu/artsci/math/wells/home.html

Copyright c 2002 by Charles Wells

Contents
List of Words and Phrases

Entries

Preface

Bibliography

About this Handbook
Overview
Point of view
Coverage
Descriptive and Prescriptive
Citations

Presentation
Superscripted cross references

Acknowledgments

Citations
Index
Left To Do
Citations needed
Information needed
TeX Problems
Things To Do

contents

wordlist

index

List of Words and Phrases
abstract algebra
abstraction
abuse of notation
accumulation of
attributes
action
ad-hoc
polymorphism
aﬃrming the
consequent
aha
algebra
algorithm addiction
algorithm
alias
all
all
always
analogy
and
angle bracket
anonymous
notation
another planet
antecedent
any
any
APOS

arbitrary
argument by
analogy
argument
argument
arity
article
assertion
assume
assumption
at most
attitudes
back formation
bad at math
bare delimiter
barred arrow
notation
bar
behaviors
be
binary operation
bind
black box
boldface
both
bound identiﬁer
bound variable
bound

brace
bracket
but
calculate
call
cardinality
cases
case
category
character
check
circumﬂex
citation
classical category
closed under
code
codomain
cognitive
dissonance
collapsing
collective plural
college algebra
college
mathematics
college
colon equals
combination
comma
4

compartmentalization
componentwise
compositional
compute
concept image
conceptual blend
conceptual
concept
conditional
assertion
conjunction
connective
consciousnessraising
example
consequent
consider
constructivism
contain
context-dependent
context
contrapositive
convention
converse error
converse
coordinatewise
copy

contents
coreference
corollary
counterexample
covert curriculum
crisp
curly brackets
dead metaphor
deﬁned in
deﬁned on
deﬁned over
deﬁniendum
deﬁniens
deﬁning equation
deﬁning expression
deﬁning phrase
deﬁnite article
deﬁnite description
deﬁnite
deﬁnition by cases
deﬁnition
deﬁnition
degenerate
degenerate
degree
delimiter
delimiting example
delineated
denote
denying the
hypothesis
dependency

wordlist
relation
dependent variable
notation
descriptive
descriptivist
determinate
dictionary
deﬁnition
discourse analysis
discourse
disjoint
disjunction
disjunctive
deﬁnition
display
distinct
distributive plural
divide
divisor
domain
dummy variable
each
easy example
elementary
element
empty set
encapsulation
endowed
enthymeme
entiﬁcation
equations

equipped
equivalence relation
equivalent
equivalent
establish notation
eternal
eureka
evaluate
every
example
existential bigamy
existential
instantiation
existential
quantiﬁer
expansive
generalization
explicit assertion
expression
extensional
external
representations
extrapolate
factorial
factor
fallacy
false symmetry
family resemblance
category
family
ﬁeld
5

index
ﬁnd
ﬁrst order logic
ﬁrst order
ﬁx
following are
equivalent
follow
formal analogy
formal language
formal logic
formal proofs
formal
formula
formula
forward reference
fraktur
free identiﬁer
free variable
free
function of n
variables
functional
function
fundamentalist
fuzzy
generalization from
examples
generalization
given
give
global identiﬁer

contents
global parameters
globally
gothic
graph
grasshopper
Greek alphabet
grounding
metaphors
grouping
guessing
hanging theorem
hat
hidden curriculum
high school algebra
hold
hypothesis
identiﬁer
identify
identity function
identity
if and only if
iﬀ
if
illustration
image
imaginary unit
implication
imply
in general
in other words
in particular

wordlist
in your own words
include
indeﬁnite article
indeﬁnite
description
inert
inﬁnite
inﬁx notation
injective
input
insight
instantiate
integer
integral
intensional
interpretation
inventory examples
inverse error
isomorphic
italics
I
JSTOR
jump the fence
just in case
just
juxtaposition
labeled style
lambda notation
larger
learned name
left Polish notation

lemmata
lemma
let
lg
light bulb mistake
linear algebra
literalist
ln
local identiﬁer
local
logarithm
logician’s semantics
look ahead
lowercase
Luddism
malrule
mapping
map
marking
matchﬁx notation
mathedu mailing
list
mathematical
deﬁnition
mathematical
discourse
mathematical
education
mathematical logic
mathematical mind
mathematical
6

index
object
mathematical
register
mathematical
structure
mathematical
vernacular
mean
member
mental
representation
metaphor
mnemonic
model
modern algebra
monster
motivating example
multiple meanings
must
myths
namely
name
narrative style
natural number
necessary
negation
never
notation
not
now
number theory

contents
N
object
object
obtain
one-to-one
only if
onto
open sentence
open sentence
open sentence
operation
operator
or equivalently
order of quantiﬁers
order
orthogonal
or
osmosis theory
outﬁx notation
output
overloaded notation
parameter
parametric
polymorphism
parenthesis
parenthetic
assertion
partial function
pathological
pattern recognition
permutation

wordlist
Platonism
plug into
plural
pointy brackets
Polish notation
polymorphic
pons asinorum
positive
postcondition
postcondition
postﬁx notation
power
precedence
precondition
predicate
predicate
preﬁx notation
prescriptive
prescriptivist
prime
process
program
pronunciation
proof by
contradiction
proof by instruction
proof
property
proper
proposition
prototype

provided that
put
quantiﬁer
Q
radial category
radial concept
range
ratchet eﬀect
real number
real
recall
reconstructive
generalization
reductionist
redundant
register
reiﬁcation
relation
relocator
representation
respectively
result
reverse Polish
notation
revise
rewrite using
deﬁnitions
right Polish
notation
root
round parentheses
7

index
rule
R
sanity check
satisfy
say
schema
scientiﬁc register
scope
scope
self-monitoring
semantic
contamination
semantics
sentence
set comprehension
setbuilder notation
set
set
should
show
snow
some
space
speciﬁc
mathematical
object
speciﬁcation
split deﬁnition
square bracket
standard
interpretation

contents
statement
status
structural notation
structure
student-professor
problem
subexpression
subscript
substitute
substitution
such that
suﬃcient
superscript
suppose
suppression of
parameters
surjective
symbol
manipulation
symbolic assertion
symbolic expression
symbolic language
symbolic logic

wordlist
symbolitis
symbol
synecdoche
syntax-driven
syntax
synthetic
technical
term
text
TFAE
that is
the following are
equivalent
then
theorem
there is
the
thus
tilde
transformer
translation problem
trigonometric
functions

trivial example
trivial
turf
type labeling
type
typical
underlying set
under
unique
universal
generalization
universal
instantiation
universal quantiﬁer
university
unnecessarily weak
assertion
unwind
up to
uppercase
vacuous implication
value
vanish

8

index
variable clash
variable
mathematical
object
variable
variate identiﬁer
variate
verify
Vulcanism
Vulcanize
walking blindfolded
well-deﬁned
when
where
without loss of
generality
witness
yes it’s weird
you don’t know
shriek
zero
Z

contents

wordlist

index

Preface
You may click on words and phrases in red for more information. In this version if a phrase in
red is split across two lines you must click on the part on the ﬁrst line. I hope to repair this for the
ﬁnal version.

About this Handbook
Overview
This Handbook is a report on mathematical discourse. Mathematical discourse includes
the special dialect of English mathematicians use to communicate mathematical reasoning
and the vocabulary that describes the behavior of mathematicians and students when
doing mathematics as well as their attitudes towards various aspects of mathematics.
The book is a report on language usage in mathematics and on the diﬃculties
students have with the language; it is not a text on how to write mathematics. The usage
is determined by citations, quotations from the literature, the method used by all
reputable dictionaries. The descriptions of the problems students have are drawn from the
mathematics education literature and the author’s own observations.
The Handbook is intended for teachers of college-level mathematics, to provide some
insight into some of the diﬃculties their students have with mathematical language, and
for graduate students and upper-level undergraduates who may ﬁnd clariﬁcation of some of
the diﬃculties they are having as they learn higher-level mathematics.
The earliest dictionaries of the English language listed only “diﬃcult” words (see
[Landau, 1989] , pages 38–43). Dictionaries such as Dr. Johnson’s that attempted
completeness came later. This Handbook is more like the earlier dictionaries, with a focus
on usages that cause problems for those who are just beginning to learn how to do
abstract mathematics. It is not like a proper dictionary in another way as well: I include
words and phrases describing behavior while doing mathematics and attitudes towards
various aspects of mathematics that I think should be more widely used.
9

contents

wordlist

index

Someday, I hope, there will be a complete dictionary based on extensive scientiﬁc
observation of written and spoken mathematical English, created by a collaborative team
of mathematicians, linguists and lexicographers. This Handbook points the way to such
an endeavor. However, its primary reason for being is to provide information about the
language to instructors and students that will make it easier for them to explain, learn
and use mathematics.
In the remainder of the Preface, I discuss some special aspects of book in more detail.
Several phrases are used that are described in more detail under that heading in the body
of the book. In particular, be warned that the deﬁnitions in the Handbook are
dictionary-style deﬁnitions, not mathematical deﬁnitions, and that some familiar words
are used with with technical meanings from logic, rhetoric or linguistics.
Point of view
This Handbook is grounded in the following beliefs.
The mathematical register Mathematicians speak and write in a special register
suitable for communicating mathematical arguments. In this book it is called the
mathematical register. The mathematical register uses special technical words, as well as
ordinary words, phrases and grammatical constructions with special meanings that may
be diﬀerent from their meaning in ordinary English.
The standard interpretation There is a standard interpretation of the mathematical
register, in the sense that at least most of the time most mathematicians would agree on
the meaning of most statements made in the register. Students have various other
interpretations of particular constructions used in the mathematical register, and one of
their tasks as students is to learn how to extract the standard interpretation from what is
said and written. One of the tasks of instructors is to teach them how to do that.
Coverage
The words and phrases listed in the Handbook are heterogeneous. The following list
describes the main types of entries in more detail.
Technical vocabulary of mathematics: Words and phrases that name mathematical
objects, relations or properties. This is not a dictionary of mathematics, and most such
10

contents

wordlist

index

words (“semigroup”, “Hausdorﬀ space”) are not included. What are included are words
that cause students diﬃculties and that occur in courses through ﬁrst year graduate
mathematics. Examples: divide, equivalence relation, function, include, positive. I have
also included briefer references to words and phrases with multiple meanings.
Logical signalers: Words, phrases and more elaborate syntactic constructions of the
mathematical register that communicate the logical structure of a mathematical
argument. Examples: if, let, thus.
Types of prose: Descriptions of the types of mathematical prose, with discussions of
special usages concerning them. Examples: deﬁnitions, theorems, labeled style.
Technical vocabulary from other disciplines: Some technical words and phrases from
rhetoric, linguistics and mathematical logic used in explaining the usage of other words in
the list. These are included for completeness. Examples: metaphor, register, disjunction,
universal quantiﬁer.
Warning: The words used from other disciplines often have ordinary English meanings
as well. In general, if you see a familiar word in red, you probably should look it up to see
what I mean by it before you ﬂame me based on a misunderstanding of my intention!
Some words for which this may be worth doing are: context, elementary, formal,
identiﬁer, interpretation, name, precondition, representation, symbol, term, type, variable.
Cognitive and psychological phenomena Names of the phenomena connected with
learning and doing mathematics. Examples: mental representation, malrule, reiﬁcation.
Much of this (but not all) is the terminology of the cognitive science or mathematical
education community. The entries attitudes, behaviors, and myths list phenomena for
which I have not been clever enough to ﬁnd or invent names.
In contrast to computer people, mathematicians rarely make up words and phrases
that describe our attitudes, behavior and mistakes, and I think that is a fault to be
remedied. I gave an argument for naming types of behavior in [Wells, 1995] .
Words mathematicians should use: This category overlaps the preceding
categories. Some of them are my own invention and some come from math education and
other disciplines. Words I introduce are always marked as such.
General academic words: Phrases such as “on the one hand . . . on the other hand”
are familiar parts of a general academic register and are not special to mathematics.
11

contents

wordlist

index

These are generally not included. However, the boundaries for what to include are
certainly fuzzy, and I have erred on the side of inclusivity.
Although the entries are of diﬀerent types, they are all in one list with lots of cross
references. This mixed-bag sort of list is suited to the purpose of the Handbook, to be an
aid to instructors and students. The “complete dictionary based on scientiﬁc observation”
mentioned here may very well be restricted quite properly to the mathematical register.
Descriptive and Prescriptive
Linguists distinguish between “ descriptive” and “ prescriptive” treatments of language.
A descriptive treatment is intended to describe the language as it is actually used, whereas
a prescriptive treatment provides rules for how the author thinks it should be used. This
text is mostly descriptive. It is an attempt to describe accurately the language actually
used by American mathematicians in the mathematical register as well as in other aspects
of communicating mathematics, rather than some ideal form of the language that they
should use. Occasionally I give opinions about usage; they are carefully marked as such.
In particular, it follows that it misses the point of the Handbook to complain that
some usage should not be included because it is wrong.
Citations
Entries are supported when possible by “ citations”, that is, quotations from textbooks
and articles about mathematics. This is in accordance with standard dictionary practice (
[Landau, 1989] , pages 151ﬀ). The sources are mostly at the college and early graduate
level. They are included in the book in a numbered list beginning on page 503. A
reference to a citation (n) means to the nth citation in that list. (In the hypertext version
you can jump directly to a citation by clicking on the reference.)
I found more than half the citations on JSTOR, a server on the web that provides
on-line access to eleven mathematical journals. I obtained access to JSTOR via the server
at Case Western Reserve University.
Most of the examples given in the entries are not citations. My intent is that the
examples be easy to understand for students beginning to study abstract mathematics, as
12

contents

wordlist

index

well as free of extraneous details.

Presentation
Superscripted cross references
In the printed version of this book, every word or phrase in the text in this sans serif
typeface (except this one!) is deﬁned or discussed on the page(s) listed in the superscript.
The page listed in that index shows the place where the item is actually discussed. For
example, as you can see, writing “the” takes you to the entry for deﬁnite article, not the
entry for “the”, which says merely, “See deﬁnite article”.
The hypertext versions, of course, don’t show the superscripted cross reference; in
those versions you can click on the marked words in this paragraph to see the deﬁnition.
In particular, if you click on “the”, you will see the discussion of the deﬁnite article.
The TEX and Awk code that accomplishes the superscripted cross references and the
hypertext versions will be made available when it is suﬃciently presentable to be seen in
public.

Acknowledgments
I am grateful for help from many sources:
• Case Western Reserve University, which granted the sabbatical leave during which I
prepared the ﬁrst version of the book, and which has continued to provide me with
electronic and library services, especially JSTOR, after I retired.
• Oberlin College, which has made me an aﬃliate scholar; I have made extensive use
of the library privileges this status gave me.
• Helpful information and corrections from or discussions with Marcia Barr, Anne
Brown, Gerard Buskes, Laurinda Brown, Christine Browning, Iben M. Christiansen,
Geddes Cureton, Tommy Dreyfus, Susanna Epp, Jeﬀrey Farmer, Cathy Kessel,
Leslie Lamport, Leon Sterling, Gary Tee, Owen Thomas Jerry Uhl, Guo Qiang
Zhang, and especially Atish Bagchi and Michael Barr.

13

contents

wordlist

index

• Many of my friends, colleagues and students who have (often unwittingly) served as
informants or guinea pigs.
• The many interesting discussions that have been taking place on the mathedu
mailing list. You can subscribe to mathedu by sending email to
majordomo@warwick.ac.uk saying: subscribe mathedu type in your email address
here .
Back to beginning of Preface

14

contents

wordlist

Entries

15

index

contents

wordlist

a, an See indeﬁnite article.

16

index

contents

wordlist

index

abstraction An abstraction of a concept C is a concept C that includes all instances

of C and that is constructed by taking as axioms certain statements that are true of all
instances of C.
Example 1 The concept of “group” is an abstraction of the concept of the set of all
symmetries of an object. The group axioms are all true statements about symmetries
when the binary operation is taken to be composition of symmetries.
Other examples are given under model and in Remark ?? under bound variable. See
also the discussions under deﬁnition, generalization and representation.

References [Dreyfus, 1992] , [Thompson, 1985] .

17

contents

wordlist

index

abuse of notation A phrase used to refer to various types of notation that is incomplete

or wrong if one insists that all symbolic expressions have compositional semantics. Two
common types of abuse of notation are suppression of parameters and synecdoche (which
overlap), and examples are given under those headings. Other usage is sometimes referred
to as abuse of notation, for example identifying two structures along an isomorphism
between them.
Citations (BusFisMar89.8), (Tei91.494).
Remark 1 The phrase “abuse of notation’ appears to me (but not to everyone) to be
deprecatory or at least apologetic, but in fact some of the uses, particularly suppression of
parameters, are necessary for readability. The phrase may be a calque on a French phrase,
but I don’t know its history. The English word “abuse” is stronger than the French word
“abus”.

Acknowledgments Marcia Barr.

18

contents

wordlist

index

aﬃrming the consequent The fallacy of deducing P from P ⇒ Q and Q. Also called
the converse error. This is a fallacy in mathematical reasoning.
Example 1 The student knows that if a function is diﬀerentiable, then it is
continuous. He concludes that the absolute value function is diﬀerentiable, since it is
clearly continuous. This is incorrect mathematical reasoning.
Citation (Epp95.36), (Ful89.248).

19

contents

wordlist

index

algebra This word has many diﬀerent meanings in the school system of the USA, and

college math majors in particular may be confused by the diﬀerences.
High school algebra is primarily algorithmic and concrete in nature.
College algebra is the name given to a college course, perhaps remedial, covering the
material covered in high school algebra.
Linear algebra may be a course in matrix theory or a course in linear
transformations in a more abstract setting.
A college course for math majors called algebra, abstract algebra, or perhaps
modern algebra, is an introduction to groups, rings, ﬁelds and perhaps modules. It is for
many students the ﬁrst course in abstract mathematics and may play the role of a ﬁlter
course. In some departments, linear algebra plays the role of the ﬁrst course in abstraction.
Universal algebra is a subject math majors don’t usually see until graduate school. It
is the general theory of structures with n-ary operations subject to equations, and is quite
diﬀerent in character from abstract algebra.

20

contents

wordlist

index

algorithm An algorithm is a speciﬁc set of actions that when carried out on data (input)

of the allowed type will produce an output. This is the meaning in mathematical
discourse. In texts on the subject of algorithm, the word is generally given a mathematical
deﬁnition, turning an algorithm into a mathematical object (compare the uses of proof).
Here, I will refer to that second sense of algorithm as program or code in order to keep
the two ideas separate. This is not in any way standard usage.
Example 1 One can write a program in Pascal and another one in C to take a list
with at least three entries and swap the second and third entries. There is a sense in
which the two programs, although diﬀerent as programs, implement the “same” abstract
algorithm.
Example 2 One might express a simpleminded algorithm for calculating a zero of a
function f (x) using Newton’s Method by saying
f (x)
“Start with a guess x and calculate
repeatedly until the answers get
f (x)
suﬃciently close together or the process has gone on too long.”
One could spell this out in more detail this way:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Choose a stopping number , the maximum number of iterations N , and a guess s.
Let n = 0.
If f (s) = 0 then stop with the message “error”.
Replace n by n + 1.
If n > N , then stop with the message “too many iterations”.
f (s)
6. Let r =
.
f (s)
7. If |r − s| < then stop; otherwise go to step 3 with s replaced by r.

Observe that neither description of the algorithm is in a programming language, but that
the second one is precise enough that it could be translated into most programming
languages quite easily. Nevertheless, it is not a program.
Citation (Bur86.423). Note that the algorithm in the citation is intermediate in
precision between the two forms of the Newton algorithm given in Example 2.

21

contents

wordlist

index

Remark 1 It appears to me that it is the naive concept of abstract (if you will)
algorithm given in the preceding examples that is referred to by the word “algorithm” as
used in mathematical discourse. In particular, the mathematical deﬁnitions of algorithm
than have been given in the theoretical computer science literature all introduce a mass of
syntactic detail that is irrelevant for understanding particular algorithms, although the
precise syntax is probably necessary for proving theorems about algorithms, such as
Turing’s theorem on the existence of a noncomputable function.
This following statement by Pomerance [1996] (page 1482) is evidence for this view
on the use of the word “algorithm”: “This discrepancy was due to fewer computers being
used on the project and some ‘down time’ while code for the ﬁnal stages of the algorithm
was being written.” Pomerance clearly distinguishes the algorithm from the code,
although he might not agree with all the points made in this article.
Remark 2 A perhaps more controversial point can be made concerning Example 1.
A computer program that swaps the second and third entries of a list might do it by
changing the values of pointers or alternatively by physically moving the entries.
(Compare the discussion under alias). They might even use one method for some types of
data (varying-length data such as strings, for example) and the other for other types
(ﬁxed-length data). I contend that in some naive sense the two methods still implement
the same algorithm at some level of abstraction.
Remark 3 An “algorithm” in the meaning given here appears to be a type of process
as that word is used in the APOS approach to describing mathematical understanding. It
seems to me that any algorithm ﬁts their notion of process. The converse would not be
true because a process need not always terminate, but I would argue that that is the only
reason the converse would not be true.
See also overloaded notation.
Acknowledgments Michael Barr.

22

contents

wordlist

index

algorithm addiction Many students have the attitude that a problem must be solved or

a proof constructed by a algorithm. They become quite uncomfortable when faced with
problem solutions that involve guessing or conceptual proofs that involve little or no
calculation.
Example 1 Recently I gave a problem in my Theoretical Computer Science class
which to solve required ﬁnding the largest integer n for which n! < 109 . Most students
solved it correctly, but several wrote apologies on their paper for doing it by trial and
error. Of course, trial and error is a method.
See also Example 1 under look ahead and the examples under conceptual.
Remark 1 Students at a more advanced level may feel insecure in the case where
they are faced with solving a problem for which they know there is no known feasible
algorithm (something which happens mostly in senior and graduate level classes). I have
seen this reaction when I asked whether two particular groups are isomorphic. I have even
known graduate students who reacted badly to this situation, but none of them got
through qualiﬁers.

23

contents

wordlist

index

alias The symmetry of the square illustrated by the ﬁgure below can be described in two
diﬀerent ways.

A

.

.

.

.

D

B

D

.

.

C

.

.

C

A

B

a) The corners of the square are relabeled, so that what was labeled A is now labeled D.
This is called the alias interpretation of the symmetry.
b) The square is turned, so that the corner labeled A is now in the upper right instead
of the upper left. This is the alibi interpretation of the symmetry.
References These names originated in [Mac Lane and Birkhoﬀ, 1993] , where they are
applied to linear transformations.
See also permutation.
Acknowledgments Michael Barr.

24

contents

wordlist

alibi See alias.

25

index

contents

wordlist

all Used to indicate the universal quantiﬁer. Examples are given under universal

index

quantiﬁer.
Remark 1 [Krantz, 1997] , page 36, warns against using “all” in a sentence such as
“All functions have a maximum”, which suggests that every function has the same
maximum. He suggests using each or every instead. (Other writers on mathematical
writing give similar advice.) The point here is that the sentence means
∀f ∃m(m is a maximum for f ), not ∃m∀f (m is a maximum for f ). See order of quantiﬁers
and Vulcanism.
Citation (Pow74.264).
I have not found a citation of the form “All X have a Y” that does mean every X has
the same Y , and I am inclined to doubt that this is ever done. (“All” is however used to
form a collective plural – see under collective plural for examples.) This does not mean
that Krantz’s advice is bad.

26

contents

wordlist

index

always Used in some circumstances to indicate universal quantiﬁcation.
Example 1
“A prime greater than 2 is always odd.”
This means, “Every prime greater than 2 is odd.”
Unlike words such as all and every, the word “always” is attached to the predicate
instead of to the noun phrase. See also never.
Remark 1 As the Oxford English Dictionary shows, this is a very old usage in
English.
Citation (GibBra85.691).

27

contents

wordlist

index

analogy An analogy between two situations is a similarity between some part of one and

some part of the other. Analogy, like metaphor, is a form of conceptual blend.
Mathematics often arises out of analogy: Problems are solved by analogy with other
problems and new theories are created by analogy with older ones. Sometimes a perceived
analogy can be put in a formal setting and becomes a theorem. Analogy in problem
solving is discussed in [Hofstadter, 1995] .
Remark 1 An argument by analogy is the claim that because of the similarity
between certain parts there must also be a similarity between some other parts. Analogy
is a powerful tool that suggests further similarities; to use it to argue for further
similarities is a fallacy.

28

contents

wordlist

anaphora See coreference.

29

index

contents

wordlist

index

and The word “and” between two assertions P and Q produces the conjunction of P

and Q.
Example 1 The assertion
“x is positive and x is less than 10.”
is true if both these statements are true: x is positive, x is less than 10.
The word “and” can also be used between two verb phrases to assert both of them
about the same subject.
Example 2 The assertion of Example 1 is equivalent to the assertion
“x is positive and less than 10.”
See also both.
Citations (BalYou77.451), (VanLutPrz77.435).
The word “and” may occur between two noun phrases as well. In that case the
translation from English statement to logical statement involves subtleties.
Example 3 “I like red or white wine” means “I like red wine and I like white wine”.
So does “I like red and white wine”. But consider also “I like red and white candy canes”!
Example 4 “John and Mary go to school” means the same thing as “John goes to
school and Mary goes to school”. “John and Mary own a car” (probably) does not mean
“John owns a car and Mary owns a car”. Consider also the possible meanings of “John
and Mary own cars”.
Example 5 In an urn ﬁlled with balls, each of a single color, “the set of red and
white balls” is the same as “the set of red or white balls”.
See also the discussion under or.
Remark 1 The preceding examples illustrate that mnemonics of the type “when you
see ‘and’ it means intersection” cannot work ; the translation problem requires genuine
understanding of both the situation being described and the mathematical structure.
In sentences dealing with physical objects, “and” also may imply a temporal order
(he lifted the weight and dropped it, he dropped the weight and lifted it), so that in
contrast to the situation in mathematical assertions, “and” may not be commutative in
talking about other things. This may be because mathematical objects are eternal.
30

contents

wordlist

index

As this discussion shows, to describe the relationship between English sentences
involving “and” and their logical meaning is quite involved and is the main subject of
[Kamp and Reyle, 1993] , Section 2.4. Things are even more confusing when the sentences
involve coreference, as many examples in [Kamp and Reyle, 1993] illustrate.
Acknowledgments The examples given above were suggested by those in the book just
referenced, those in [Schweiger, 1996] , and in comments by Atish Bagchi and Michael
Barr.

31

contents

wordlist

index

angle bracket Angle brackets are the symbols “ ” and “ ”. They are used as outﬁx
notation to denote various constructions, most notably an inner product as in v, w .

Terminology Angle brackets are also called pointy brackets.
Citation (Mea93.387).

32

contents

wordlist

anonymous notation See structural notation.

33

index

contents

wordlist

index

another planet Sometimes an author or teacher will give a diﬀerent deﬁnition to a term

that has acquired a reasonably standard meaning. This may even be done without
warning the reader or student that the deﬁnition is deviant. I would say that the person
doing this is on another planet; that author has no sense of being in a community of
scholars who expect to have a common vocabulary.
Example 1 In recent years, authors of high school and lower-level college texts
commonly write A ⊆ B to mean that A is included in B. Citation: (Str93.3). Some of
these write A ⊂ B to mean that A is properly included in B (citations (GraTre96.234),
(Sol95.144)), thereby clashing with the usage in research literature. This was probably the
result of formal analogy.
Using A ⊂ B to mean A is properly included in B seems to be much less common
that the usage of “⊆” and in my opinion should be deprecated.
Another example is Example 2 under semantic contamination.

34

contents

wordlist

antecedent The hypothesis of a conditional assertion.

35

index

contents

wordlist

any Used to denote the universal quantiﬁer. See also arbitrary.

36

index

contents

wordlist

index

APOS The APOS approach to the way students learn mathematics analyzes a student’s

understanding of a mathematical concept as developing in (at least) three stages: action,
process, object. The “S” in “APOS” stands for schema. I will describe these four ideas
in terms of computing the value of a function, but the ideas are applied more generally
than in that way. This discussion is oversimpliﬁed but, I believe, does convey the basic
ideas in rudimentary form. The discussion draws heavily on [DeVries, 1997] .
A student’s understanding is at the action stage when she can carry out the
computation of the value of a function in the following sense: after performing each step
she knows what the next step is. The student is at the process stage when she can
conceive of the process as a whole, as an algorithm, without actually carrying it out. She
is at the mathematical object stage when she can conceive of the function as a entity in
itself on which mathematical operations (for example diﬀerentiation) can be performed. A
student’s schema for any piece of mathematics is a coherent collection of actions, processes
and objects that she can bring to bear on problems in that area (but see
compartmentalization).
A brief overview of this theory is in [DeVries, 1997] , and it is discussed in detail in
[Thompson, 1994] , pp. 26ﬀ and [Asiala et al., 1996] , pp. 9ﬀ. See also [Sfard, 1992] (who
gives a basic discussion of mathematical objects in the context of functions), [Carlson,
1998] , [Dubinsky and Harel, 1992] , the discussion of object and process in [Hersh, 1997b]
, pages 77ﬀ, and [Piere and Kieren, 1989] .

37

contents

wordlist

index

arbitrary Used to emphasize that there is no restriction on the mathematical structure

referred to by the noun that follows. One could usually use any in this situation instead of
“arbitrary”.
Example 1 “The equation xr xs = xr+s holds in an arbitrary semigroup, but the
equation xr y r = (xy)r requires commutativity.”
Citations (KupPri84.86), (MorShaVal93.749).
In a phrase such as “Let S be an arbitrary set” the word arbitrary typically signals
an expectation of an upcoming universal generalization. “Any” could be used here as well.
Citation (Str93.7), where the phrase begins a proof of the associative law for
intersection.

Diﬃculties Students are frequently bothered by constructions that seem arbitrary. Some
examples are discussed under yes it’s weird.

38

contents

wordlist

argument [1] The input to a function may be called the argument.
Citation (Zal75.813).

39

index

contents

wordlist

index

argument [2] A proof may be called an argument.
Remark 1 The colloquial meaning of “argument” is a disagreement, perhaps with a
connotation of unpleasantness. I am not aware that this has caused semantic
contamination among students.
Citation (AldDia86.333), (Oss79.5).

40

contents

wordlist

index

arity The arity of a function is the number of arguments taken by the function. The word

is most commonly used for symbols denoting functions.
Example 1 The arity of sin is one.
Example 2 The arity of + is two. It takes two arguments.
Remark 1 A function that takes n inputs is also called a function of n variables. In
using the notation given here the order in which the variables are listed is important; for
example, one cannot assume in general that f (2, 3) = f (3, 2).
Remark 2 A function of two variables may be analyzed as a function f : R × R → R
where R × R is the cartesian product of R with itself. In that sense it is a function with
one input, which must be an ordered pair. I take that point of view in my class notes
[Wells, 1997] ; students in my class from time to time ask me why I don’t write f ((x, y)).
Remark 3 One sometimes ﬁnds functions with variable arity. For example, one
might use MAX for the maximum of a list, and write MAX(3, 8, 5) = 8 or
MAX(9, 9, −2, 5) = 9.
Example 3 Computer languages such as Lisp and Mathematica R have some
functions with variable arity. The expression +(3, 5, 5) in Lisp evaluates to 13, and so does
the expression Sum[3,5,5] in Mathematica.
Of course, one might take a point of view here analogous to that of Remark 2 and say
that MAX has one input which must be a list.
In general, variable arity is possible only for functions written in preﬁx or postﬁx
notation with delimiters. When the symbol for addition (and similar symbols) is written
in inﬁx, Polish or reverse Polish notation, the symbol must have exactly two arguments.
Thus the symbol + in Mathematica has arity ﬁxed at 2.
Citations (ArbMan74.169).

41

contents

wordlist

index

article The articles in English are the indeﬁnite article “a” (with variant “an”) and the
deﬁnite article “the”. Most of the discussion of articles is under those heads.
Remark 1 Both articles can cause diﬃculties with students whose native language
does not have anything equivalent. A useful brief discussion aimed at such students is
given by [Kohl, 1995] . The discussion in this Handbook is restricted to uses that cause
special diﬃculty in mathematics.

42

contents

wordlist

assertion An assertion or statement is a symbolic expression or English sentence

index

(perhaps containing symbolic expressions), that may contain variate identiﬁers, which
becomes deﬁnitely true or false if determinate identiﬁers are substituted for all the variate
ones. If the assertion is entirely symbolic it is called a symbolic assertion or (in
mathematical logic) a formula or a predicate. Contrast with term.
The pronunciation of a symbolic assertion may vary with its position in the discourse.
See parenthetic assertion.
Example 1 “2+2=4” is an assertion. It contains no variate identiﬁers. In
mathematical logic such an assertion may be called a sentence or proposition.
Example 2 “x > 0” is an assertion. The only variate identiﬁer is x. The assertion
becomes a true statement if 3 is substituted for x and a false statement if −3 is
substituted for x.
By contrast, “x + 2y” is not an assertion, it is a term; it does not become true or false
when numbers are substituted for x and y, it merely becomes an expression denoting a
number.
Example 3 The sentence
“Either f (x) is positive or f (2x) is negative.”
is an assertion. It is not a symbolic assertion, which in this Handbook means one that is
entirely symbolic. The variables are f and x (this is discussed further under variable.)
The assertion becomes true if cos is substituted for f and π/2 is substituted for x. It
becomes false if sin is substituted for f and 0 is substituted for x.
Remark 1 It is useful to think of an assertion as a function with “true” and “false”
as values, deﬁned on a complicated domain consisting of statements and the possible
values of their free variables.

Acknowledgments Owen Thomas.

43

contents

wordlist

assume See let.

44

index

contents

wordlist

index

assumption The hypothesis of a conditional assertion is sometimes called the assumption.

45

contents

wordlist

index

at most For real numbers x and y, the phrase “x is at most y” means x ≤ y.
Diﬃculties Many students, including native English speakers (how many depends in part
on the educational institution), do not understand this phrase. Some of them also don’t
understand “at least” and “not more than”.
Citation (Bry93.62), (Mau78.575).

46

contents

wordlist

index

attitudes Instructors, students and laymen have certain attitudes towards mathematics
and its presentation that I think deserve names. A few are listed in this Handbook:
algorithm addiction
another planet
fundamentalist
guessing
light bulb mistake

Luddism
mathematical mind
myths
osmosis theory
Platonism

Vulcanism
walking blindfolded
yes it’s weird

Here are some attitudes that needs names:
(a) I never would have thought of that Example 1 under look ahead discusses the example
in [Olson, 1998] of deriving a trig identity from the Pythagorean identity. One student,
faced with the ﬁrst step in the derivation, dividing the equation by c, said, “How would I
ever know to divide by c?” I have noticed that it is common for a student to be bothered
by a step that he feels he could not have thought of. My response in class to this is to say:
Nevertheless, you can understand the proof, and now you know a new trick.
(b) No expertise required There seem to be subjects about which many educated people
both have strong opinions and apparently are not aware that there is a body of knowledge
connected with the subject. English usage is such a subject in the USA: many
academicians who have never read a style book and know nothing about the discoveries
concerning grammar and usage that have been made in this century nevertheless are
eloquent in condemning or upholding split inﬁnitives, commas after the penultimate entry
in a series, and the like.
Happily or not, mathematics is not one of these bodies of knowledge.
Non-mathematicians typically don’t believe they know much about mathematics (some
engineers are an exception).
On the other hand, many mathematicians take this attitude towards certain subjects;
programming is one, and another is mathematics education.
(c) I had to learn it so they should learn it It is noticeable that in curriculum committees
professors strenuously resist relaxing a requirement that was in eﬀect when they were
47

contents

wordlist

index

students. In mathematical settings this tends to be expressed in sentences such as, “It is
inconceivable that anyone could call himself a math major who has never had to integrate
cos3 x” (or whatever). This is clearly related to the you don’t know shriek and to Luddism.
(d) I can’t even balance my checkbook Many people who have had little association with
mathematics believe that mathematics is about numbers and that mathematicians spend
their time calculating numbers.
See also behaviors and myths.

48

contents

wordlist

index

back formation One may misread a word, perhaps derived from some root by some

(often irregular) rule, as having been derived from some other nonexistent root in a more
regular way. Using the nonexistent root creates a word called a back formation.
Example 1 The student who refers to a “matricee” has engaged in back formation
from “matrices”, which is derived irregularly from “matrix”. See plural for more examples.

49

contents

wordlist

bad at math See mathematical mind.

50

index

contents

wordlist

index

bar A line drawn over a single-symbol identiﬁer is pronounced “bar”. For example, x is
¯
pronounced “x bar”. Other names for this symbol are “macron” and “vinculum”.

Acknowledgments Atish Bagchi.

51

contents

wordlist

index

barred arrow notation A notation for specifying a function. It uses a barred arrow with
an identiﬁer for the input variable on the left and an expression or name that describes
the value of the function on the right.
Example 1 “The function x → x2 has exactly one critical point.” Compare lambda
notation.
Citation (MacBir93.43).
Remark 1 One can substitute input values of the correct type into barred arrow
expressions, in contrast to lambda expressions (see bound variable).
Example 2 One can say
“Under the function x → x2 , one may calculate that 2 → 4.”

52

contents

wordlist

index

be The verb “to be” has many uses in the English language. Here I mention a few
common usages in mathematical texts.

(a) Has a property Examples given under property.
(b) To give a deﬁnition In a statement such as these:
1.
“A group is Abelian if xy = yx for all elements x and y.”
2.
“A semigroup is a set with an associative multiplication deﬁned on it.”
“is” connects a deﬁniendum with the conditions deﬁning it. See mathematical
deﬁnition for other examples.
Citations (Cho99.444), (Gal94.352).
(c) Is identical to The word “is” in the statement
“An idempotent function has the property that its image is its set of ﬁxed
points.”
asserts that two mathematical descriptions (“its image” and “its set of ﬁxed points”)
denote the same mathematical object. This is the same as the meaning of “=”, and is a
special case of meaning (a).
Citations (Bar96.627), (Bri93.782), (Duk97.193).
(d) Asserting existence See existential quantiﬁer for examples.
Citation (LewPap98.20), (Rib95.391).

53

contents

wordlist

index

behaviors Listed here are a number of behaviors that occur among mathematicians and

students. Some of these phenomena have names (in some cases I have named them) and
are discussed under that name. Many phenomena that need names are listed below. See
also attitudes and myths.
Computer programmers have many names for both productive and unproductive
behaviors and attitudes involving programming, many of them detailed in [Raymond,
1991] (see “creationism”, “mung” and “thrash” for example). Mathematicians should
emulate them. Having a name for a phenomenon makes it more likely that you will be
aware of it in situations where it might occur and it makes it easier for a teacher to tell a
student what went wrong.
I don’t know of any literature from the mathematical education community about the
idea that naming dysfunctional behavior makes it easier to avoid. (See [Wells, 1995] .)
(1) Behaviors that have names
insight
jump the fence
malrule
sanity check
self-monitoring
semantic contamination
symbolitis
synecdoche
yes it’s weird
you don’t know shriek

aﬃrming the consequent
another planet
compartmentalization
covert curriculum
denying the hypothesis
enthymeme
existential bigamy
extrapolate
formal analogy
grasshopper
(2) Behaviors that need names

(a) Excluding special cases Usually, a generalization of a mathematical concept will be
deﬁned in such a way as to include the special case it generalizes. Thus a square is a
rectangle and a group is a semigroup. Students sometimes exclude the special case, saying
“rectangle” to mean that the ﬁgure is not a square, or asking something such as “Is it a
group or a semigroup?” I have seen a discussion of this in the mathematical education
54

contents

wordlist

index

literature but have lost the reference. I understand also that some high school texts
speciﬁcally state that a square is not a rectangle; I would appreciate veriﬁcation of this.
References needed.
(b) Missing relational arguments Using a binary relation word with only one argument.
For an example, see disjoint. Students often do this with “relatively prime”.
(c) Forgetting to check trivial cases
Example 1 A proof about positive integers that begins,
“Let p be a prime divisor of n.”
The integer 1 has no prime divisors.
(d) Proving a conditional assertion backward When asked to prove P ⇒ Q a student may
come up with a proof beginning “If Q . . . ” and ending “ . . . therefore P ”, thus proving
Q ⇒ P . This is distressingly common among students in discrete mathematics and other
courses where I teach beginning mathematical reasoning. I suspect it comes from proving
equations in high school, starting with the equation to be proved.
(e) Reading variable names as labels An assertion such as “There are six times as many
students as professors” is translated by some students as 6s = p instead of 6p = s (where p
and s have the obvious meanings). This is discussed in [Nesher and Kilpatrick, 1990] ,
pages 101–102. People in mathematical education refer to this as the student-professor
problem, but I don’t want to adopt that as a name; in some sense every problem in
teaching is a student-professor problem. See sanity check.
(f ) Unclassiﬁable This particular incident has happened to me twice, with two diﬀerent
students: The student became quite upset (much more than merely puzzled) when I said,
“Let p be an odd prime.” He was bothered because there is only one prime that is not
odd. The student has some expectation that is being violated but I have no idea what it is.

55

contents

wordlist

binary operation See operation.

56

index

contents

wordlist

index

boldface A style of printing that looks like this. Section headings are often in boldface,
and some authors put a deﬁniendum in boldface. See deﬁnition.

57

contents

wordlist

both Used as an intensiﬁer with and to express a conjunction of two assertions.
Example 1 “2 is both even and a prime.”
Citations (Ros93.293), (Kra95.40).
“Both” is also used with or to emphasize that it is inclusive.
Example 2 “If m is even and m = rs then either r or s (or both) is even.”
Citation (BumKocWes93b.499).

58

index

contents

wordlist

index

bound identiﬁer An identiﬁer is bound if it occurs in a phrase that translates directly

into a symbolic expression in which the identiﬁer becomes a bound variable. This
typically occurs with the use of English quantiﬁers such as all and every, as well as
phrases describing sums, products and integrals. An identiﬁer that is not bound is a free
identiﬁer.
Example 1 “Any increasing function has a positive derivative.” The phrase
“increasing function” is bound. This sentence could be translated into the symbolic
expression “∀f (INC(f ) ⇒ f > 0)”.
Remark 1 The deﬁnition given here reduces the concept of bound noun phrases to
what “bound” means in symbolic expressions. I know of no precedent for this in the
literature.
Remark 2 Modern linguists use a formalism for studying generalized quantiﬁers that
interpret a bound noun phrase as a set of sets. See [Chierchia and McConnell-Ginet, 1990]
, Chapter 9.
See also variate identiﬁer.

59

contents

wordlist

index

bound variable A variable is bound in a symbolic expression if it is within the scope of
an operator that turns the symbolic expression into something referring collectively to all
the values of the variable (perhaps within limits). The operator is said to bind the
variable. The operators that can do this include the existential and universal quantiﬁers,
the integral sign, the sum and product notations Σ and Π, and various notations for
functions. (See also bound identiﬁer.) A variable that is not bound is free.

Terminology Bound variables are also called dummy variables. The latter phrase has low
status.
A key property of a bound variable is that one is not allowed to substitute for it (but
see Example 3).
Example 1 In the expression x2 + 1, the x is a free variable. However, in
5 2
3 x + 1 dx it is bound by the integral sign.
Example 2 In the symbolic assertion x > 7, x is free. In ∀x(x > 7) it is bound by
the universal quantiﬁer (resulting in a false statement).
Example 3 This example is more subtle. In the following sentence, intended to
deﬁne a function,
“Let f (x) = x2 + 1.”
the variable x is bound. It is true that one can substitute for the x in the equation to get,
for example f (2) = 5, but that substitution changes the character of the statement, from
the deﬁning equation of a function to a statement about one of its values. It is clearer
that the variable x is bound in this statement
“Let the function f (x) be deﬁned by f (x) = x2 + 1.”
which could not be transformed into
“Let the function f (2) be deﬁned by f (2) = 22 + 1.”
These remarks apply also to the variables that occur in lambda notation, but see
Example 2 under barred arrow notation.
Diﬃculties Students ﬁnd it diﬃcult to learn how to use bound variables correctly. They
may allow variable clash. They may not understand that which bound variable it is does
5
5
not matter (except for variable clash); thus 2 x2 dx and 2 t2 dt are the same by their
60

contents

wordlist

index

form. They may move a bound variable out of its binder, for example changing n i2 to
i=1
i n i (which makes it easy to “solve”!). And they may substitute for it, although in my
i=1
teaching experience that is uncommon. I am not aware of any mathematical education
literature on this. References needed.
Remark 1 The discussion in Remark 2 under free variable applies to bound variables
as well.

61

contents

wordlist

brace Braces are the symbols “{” and “}”.

index

A very common use of braces is in setbuilder notation.
Example 1 The set {(x, y) | y = x2 } is a parabola in the plane.
Citation (Bri93.782).
They are also used occasionally as bare delimiters and as outﬁx notation for functions.
Example 2 The expression 6/{(12 + 32 ) − 22 } evaluates to 1.
Example 3 The fractional part of a real number r is denoted by {r}.
Citations (Loe91.243), (RabGil93.168), (Sta70a.774).
A left brace may be used by itself in a deﬁnition by cases (see the example under
cases).

Terminology Braces are sometimes called curly brackets.

62

contents

wordlist

index

bracket This word has several related usages.
(a) Certain delimiters In common mathematical usage, brackets are any of the delimiters
in the list
()[]{}
Some American dictionaries restrict the meaning to square brackets or angle brackets.
(b) Operation The word “bracket” is used in various mathematical specialties as the
name of an operation (for example, Lie bracket, Toda bracket, Poisson bracket) in an
algebra (often of operators) with a value in another structure. The operation called
bracket may use use square brackets, braces or angle brackets to denote the operation, but
the usage for a particular operation may be ﬁxed as one of these. Thus the Lie bracket of
v and w is denoted by by [v, w]. On the other hand, notation for the Poisson and Toda
brackets varies.
Citations (Wal93.786), (GraPugShu94.304), (BenDav94.295).
(c) Quantity The word “bracket” may be used to denote the quantity inside a pair of
brackets (in the sense of (a)).
Example 1 If the expression (x2 − 2x + 1) + (e2x − 5)3 is zero, then the two brackets
are opposite in sign.
Citation (Ver91.501).

63

contents

wordlist

index

but
(a) And with contrast As a conjunction, “but” typically means the same as “and”, with
an indication that what follows is surprising or in contrast to what precedes it. This is a
standard usage in English, not peculiar to the mathematical register.
Example 1 “5 is odd, but 6 is even.”
(b) Introduces new property Mathematical authors may begin a sentence with “But” to
indicate that the subject under discussion has an additional property that will now be
mentioned, typically because it leads to the next step in the reasoning. This usage may
carry with it no thought of contrast or surprise. The property may be one that is easy to
deduce or one that has already been derived or assumed. Of course, in this usage “but”
still means “and” as far as the logic goes; it is the connotations that are diﬀerent from the
usage in (a).
Example 2 “We have now shown that m = pq, where p and q are primes. But this
implies that m is composite.”
Example 3 (In a situation where we already know that x = 7):
√
“ . . . We ﬁnd that x2 + y 2 = 100. But x is 7, so y = 51.”
See also just.
References [Chierchia and McConnell-Ginet, 1990] , pages 283–284.
Citations (Ant84.121), (Epp95.2), (Hol95.206).
Acknowledgments Atish Bagchi

64

contents

wordlist

index

calculate To calculate is to perform symbol manipulation on an expression to arrive at

another, perhaps more satisfactory, expression.
Example 1 “Let us calculate the roots of the equation x2 − 4x + 1 = 0.”
Example 2 “An easy calculation shows that the equation x3 − 5x = 0 factors into
linear factors over the reals.”
Example 3
“We may calculate that ¬(∀x∃y(x > y 2 ) is equivalent to ∃x∀y(x ≤ y 2 ).”
Remark 1 Calculation most commonly involves algebraic manipulation, but the rules
used may be in some other system, as Example 3 exhibits (ﬁrst order logic in that case).
Remark 2 It is my impression that nonmathematicians, including many
mathematics students, restrict the word “calculation” to symbol manipulation that comes
up with a numerical answer. This may be merely the result of the belief that
mathematicians deal primarily with numbers (see item (d) under attitudes).
In contrast, I have heard mathematicians refer to calculating some object when the
determination clearly involved conceptual reasoning, not symbol manipulation, as in the
citation listed below.
See also compute.
Citations (EdeKos95.7),

65

contents

wordlist

index

call Used to form a deﬁnition.
Example 1 “A monoid is called a group if every element has an inverse.”Citation:
(Str93.3)
Example 2 “Let g = h−1 f h. We call g the conjugate of f by h.” Citation:
(BasKul90.845), (Cur93.790), (Mar92.739).
Example 3 “We call an integer even if it is divisible by 2.” Citation: (Fre90.705),
(LewPap98.20).
Remark 1 Some object to the usage in Example 3, saying “call” should be used only
when you are giving a name to the object as in Examples 1 and 2. However, the usage
with adjectives has been in the language for centuries. Citation: (Luk49.56).
See also algorithm addiction.

66

contents

wordlist

index

cardinality The cardinality of a ﬁnite set is the number of elements of the set. This

terminology is extended to inﬁnite sets either by referring to the set as inﬁnite or by using
more precise words such as “countably inﬁnite” or “uncountable”.
The cardinality of a group or other structure is the cardinality of its underlying set.

Diﬃculties Inﬁnite cardinality behaves in a way that violates the expectation of students.
More about this under snow. The book [Lakoﬀ and N´nez, 2000] gives a deep discussion
u˜
of the metaphors underlying the concept of inﬁnity in Chapters 8–10.
Citations (Lor71.753).

67

contents

wordlist

index

case The Roman alphabet, the Greek alphabet, and the Cyrillic alphabet have two forms
of letters, “capital” or uppercase, A, B, C, etc, and lowercase, a, b, c, etc. As far as I
can tell, case distinction always matters in mathematics. For example, one may use a
capital letter to name a mathematical structure and the same letter in lowercase to name
an element of the structure.
Remark 1 The font used may also be signiﬁcant.

Diﬃculties American students at the freshman calculus level or below quite commonly do
not distinguish uppercase from lowercase when taking notes.
Citations (Oso94.760), (KolBusRos96.111).

68

contents

wordlist

index

cases A concept is deﬁned by cases if it is dependent on a parameter and the deﬁning
expression is diﬀerent for diﬀerent values of the parameter. This is also called a
disjunctive deﬁnition or split deﬁnition.
Example 1 Let f : R → R be deﬁned by
f (x) =

1

x>0

−1 x ≤ 0

Citation: (MarDanSep98.116).
Diﬃculties Students often ﬁnd disjunctive deﬁnitions unnatural. This may be because
real life deﬁnitions are rarely disjunctive. (One exception is the concept of “strike” in
baseball.) This requires further analysis.

69

contents

wordlist

index

category The word “category” is used with two unrelated meanings in mathematics

(Baire and Eilenberg-Mac Lane). It is used with a third meaning by some cognitive
scientists, meaning roughly what in this book is usually called “concept”. What I would
call an instance of the concept they call a member of the category, so the focus of the
word is a bit more extensional whereas “concept” is more intensional.

70

contents

wordlist

index

character A character is a typographical symbol such as the letter “a” and the digit “3”.
A symbol in the sense of this Handbook may consist of more than one character.
Example 1 The expression “sin” as in “sin π = 0” is a symbol in the sense of this
Handbook composed of three characters.
Remark 1 Of course, “character” also has a mathematical meaning.

71

contents

wordlist

index

check The symbol “ˇ” over a letter is commonly pronounced “check” by mathematicians.
For example, x is pronounced “x check”. The typographical name for this symbol is
ˇ
“h´ˇek”.
ac

72

contents

wordlist

index

circumﬂex The symbol ˆ is a circumﬂex. Mathematicians commonly pronounce it hat:
thus x is pronounced “x hat”.
ˆ

73

contents

wordlist

index

closed under A set is closed under an operation if the image of the operation is a subset
of the set.
Example 1 The set of positive integers is closed under addition but not under
subtraction. Citation: (Hol95.222).

Acknowledgments Guo Qiang Zhang.

74

contents

wordlist

code See algorithm.

75

index

contents

wordlist

index

codomain The codomain of a function must be a set that contains every value of the

function. It may be named in any way that sets are named.
Authors vary much more in the treatment of the codomain than they do in the
treatment of the domain. Many authors do not require that a function have a speciﬁed
codomain; others don’t make it clear whether they require it or not.
Even when authors do require speciﬁcation of the codomain, the speciﬁcation is often
an empty gesture since the text fudges the question of whether two functions with the
same domains and same graphs but diﬀerent codomains are really diﬀerent. As an
example, consider two sets A and B with A ⊆ B, and consider the identity function from
A to A and the inclusion function i : A → B deﬁned by i(a) = a. Are they the same
function? Some texts treat them as diﬀerent, others don’t make it clear whether they are
the same or diﬀerent.
See range and image.
Citation (Bri85.184).

76

contents

wordlist

index

cognitive dissonance Cognitive dissonance is a term introduced in [Festinger, 1957] . It

concerns conﬂicting understandings of some aspect of the world caused by two diﬀerent
modes of learning. The conﬂict may be resolved by suppressing the results of one of the
modes of learning. Two types of cognitive dissonance are discussed in their own articles:
formal analogy and semantic contamination.
Cognitive dissonance also occurs when the deﬁnition allows behavior unfamiliar from
examples; see Example 2 under prototype.
Remark 1 The book [Festinger, 1957] exhibits some astonishingly bigoted attitudes.

References Cognitive dissonance is discussed further in [Bagchi and Wells, 1998a] ,
[Brown and Dobson, 1996] , [Carkenord and Bullington, 1993] .
Acknowledgments Thanks to Geddes Cureton and Laurinda Brown for suggesting
references.

77

contents

wordlist

index

collective plural Using the plural of an identiﬁer to refer to the entire collection of items
designated by the identiﬁer.
Example 1
“Let H be a subgroup of G. The left cosets of H are a partition of G.”
I do not have a citation for this sort of wording , although I have heard people use it.
Example 2 “Let Q be the rational numbers.” Citation: (DavPri90.3), (Ros95.504).
Remark 1 It appears to me that the usage shown in the two examples above is
uncommon. It probably should be deprecated. Usually a word such as “form” or
“constitute” is used, or else one refers to the set of cosets.
Example 3 “The left cosets of H constitute a partition of G.”
Example 4 “The rational numbers form a dense subset of the reals.”
Example 5 “The set of all cosets of H is a partition of G.”
See distributive plural.
Citation (Niv56.83).

References [Lønning, 1997] , [Kamp and Reyle, 1993] , pages 320ﬀ.

78

contents

wordlist

index

college In the United States, a college is an institution one attends after graduating from
high school (secondary school) that gives (usually) a B.S. or B.A. degree. A university
also grants these degrees; the name “university” usually, but not always, connotes that the
institution also grants other, higher, degrees. The usage is diﬀerent in most other
countries.
In this text, the phrase college mathematics denotes what in most other countries
could be called “university mathematics”. This is not quite correct, since much of the
content of American freshman calculus would probably be taught in secondary school (or
in a school that one attends between secondary school and university) in other countries.

79

contents

wordlist

index

colon equals The expression “ : =” means “(is) deﬁned to be equal to”.
Example 1 “S : = {1, 2, 3} is a ﬁnite set.” This is a short way of saying:
“Deﬁne S to be the set {1, 2, 3}. Then S is ﬁnite.”
This usage is not very common, but my impression is that it is gaining ground.
Remark 1 In citations this seems to occur mostly in parenthetic assertions. This
may be because it is hard to make an independent assertion that both is non-redundant
and does not start with a symbol. Consider
“Let S : = {1, 2, 3}.”
(Or “Deﬁne . . . ”) The word “Let” already tells you we are deﬁning S.
Citation (Bar96.631); (Pow96.879). Note that although the colon equals usage is
borrowed from computer languages, these two citations come from works in areas outside
computing.
Acknowledgments Gary Tee.

80

contents

wordlist

index

combination An r-combination of a set S is an r-element subset of S. “Combination” is
the word used in combinatorics. Everywhere else in mathematics, a subset is called a
subset.
Citation (Str93.119).

81

contents

wordlist

index

comma In symbolic expressions, a comma between symbolic assertions may denote and.
Example 1

The set

{m | m = n2 , n ∈ Z}

denotes the set of squares of integers. The deﬁning condition is: m = n2 and n is an
integer.
Citations (Dra95.258), (Gri99.128).
Remark 1 The comma is used the same way in standard written English. Consider
“A large, brown bear showed up at our tent”.
The comma may also be used to indicate many-to-one coreference,
Example 2 “Let x, y = 0.”
Citation (Niv56.41), (Oso94.760).
Acknowledgments Michael Barr.

82

contents

wordlist

index

compartmentalization A student may have several competing ways of understanding a

concept which may even be inconsistent with each other. For example, when doing
calculus homework, she may think of functions exclusively in terms of deﬁning
expressions, in spite of the fact that she can repeat the ordered-pairs deﬁnition when
asked and may even be able to give an example of a function in terms of ordered pairs,
not using a deﬁning expression. In other words, deﬁning expressions are for doing
homework except when the question is “give the deﬁnition of ‘function’ ”!
This phenomenon is called compartmentalization. The student has not constructed a
coherent schema for (in this case) “function”.

References [Tall and Vinner, 1981] , [Vinner and Dreyfus, 1989] .

83

contents

wordlist

componentwise See coordinatewise.

84

index

contents

wordlist

index

compositional The meaning of a symbolic expression in mathematics is normally

determined by the meanings of the symbols that make it up and by their arrangement
(the syntax). Some examples are given under symbolic expression; see also Remark 1
under syntax. Such semantics is said to be compositional or synthetic or syntax-driven.
In contrast, the meaning of a word cannot usually be synthesized from its spelling; the
relationship between spelling and meaning is essentially arbitrary. As an example, consider
the diﬀerent roles of the letter “i” in the symbol “sin” and in the expression “3 − 2i”.
The symbolic language of mathematics generally has compositional semantics. Most
of the examples of failure of compositionality that I have been able to ﬁnd are examples of
one of these four phenomena (which overlap, but no one of them includes another):
a) context sensitivity.
b) conventions.
c) suppression of parameters.
d) synecdoche.
Examples are given under those headings.
Remark 1 Some symbolic expressions are multivalued, for example
x2 dx
which is determined only up to an added constant. I don’t regard this as failure of
compositionality; the standard meaning of the expression is multivalued.
The English-language part of the mathematical register also fails to be compositional
in certain cases.
Example 1 Texts commonly deﬁne an ordering to be a reﬂexive, antisymmetric and
transitive relation, and a strict ordering using trichotomy. The consequence is that a
strict ordering is not an ordering. This sort of thing is common in natural language; see
radial concept.

85

contents

wordlist

index

compute “Compute” is used in much the same way as calculate, except that it is perhaps
more likely to imply that a computer was used.
Remark 1 As in the case of calculate, research mathematicians often refer to
computing an object when the process involves conceptual reasoning as well as symbol
manipulation.
Citation (How93.8).

86

contents

wordlist

index

concept Mathematical concepts given by mathematical deﬁnitions always have the

following property: an object is an instance of the concept if and only if it has all the
attributes required of it by the deﬁnition. An object either satisﬁes the deﬁnition or not,
and all objects that satisfy the deﬁnition have equal logical status.
Mathematical concepts are thus deﬁned by an accumulation of attributes. Most
deﬁnitions in science writing outside of mathematics are not by accumulation of attributes.
Scientiﬁc deﬁnitions are discussed in detail in [Halliday and Martin, 1993] , who clearly
regard accumulation of attributes as a minor and exceptional method of deﬁnition; they
mention this process in Example 13 on page 152 almost as an afterthought.
It is a more familiar fact that mathematical concepts are also crisp, as opposed to
fuzzy. An algebraic structure is either a group or it is not, but one can argue about
whether Australia is a continent or a large island.
Most human concepts are not given by accumulation of attributes and are not crisp.
They typically have internal structure. See [Lakoﬀ, 1986] , especially the discussion in
Section 1, and [Pinker and Prince, 1999] . The latter reference distinguishes between
family resemblance categories and classical categories; the latter are those that in my
terminology are deﬁned by accumulation of attributes.
Some aspects of human concepts are discussed under prototype and radial concept.
See also the discussion under category.
Remark 1 Of course every student’s and every mathematician’s mental
representation of a mathematical concept has more internal structure than merely the
accumulation of attributes. Some instances loom large as prototypical and others are
called by rude names such as pathological because they are unpleasant in some way.
Students may erroneously expect to reason with mathematical concepts using
prototypes the way they (usually unconsciously) reason about everyday concepts. (See
generalization.) On the other hand, students with some skill in handling mathematical
concepts can shift psychologically between this extra internal structure and the bare
structure given by accumulation of attributes, using the ﬁrst for motivation and new ideas
and the second in proofs. This shifting in the general context of human reasoning is
discussed in [Pinker and Prince, 1999] , section 10.4.4.

87

contents

wordlist

index

Remark 2 Many mathematical concepts are abstractions of a prior,
non-mathematical concept that may be fuzzy, and one can argue about whether the
mathematical deﬁnition captures the prior concept. Note the discussions in
subsections (3) and (4) under deﬁnition.
See also indeﬁnite article.
References [Bagchi and Wells, 1998a] , [Bagchi and Wells, 1998b] , [Vinner, 1992] .
Deﬁnitions in science in general are discussed by [Halliday and Martin, 1993]
pages 148–150, 170ﬀ, 209ﬀ.
Acknowledgments Thanks to Michael Barr for catching sloppy thinking in a previous
version of this article, and to Tommy Dreyfus and Jeﬀrey Farmer for helpful references.

88

contents

wordlist

concept image See mental representation.

89

index

contents

wordlist

index

conceptual A proof is conceptual if it is an argument that makes use of one’s mental

representation or geometric insight. It is opposed to a proof by symbol manipulation.
Example 1 Let m and n be positive integers, and let r be m mod n. One can prove
that GCD(m, n) = GCD(m, r) by showing that the set of common divisors of m and n is
the same as the set of common divisors of n and r (easy); the result follows because the
GCD of two numbers is the greatest common divisor, that is, the maximum of the set of
common divisors of the two numbers.
I have shown my students this proof many times, but they almost never reproduce it
on an examination.
Example 2 Now I will provide three proofs of the same assertion, adapted from
[Wells, 1995] .
The statement to prove is that for all x, y and z,
(x > z) ⇒ ((x > y) ∨ (y > z))

(1)

(a) Conceptual proof We may visualize x and z on the real line as in this picture:
.

z
•

x
•

.

There are three diﬀerent regions into which we can place y. In the left two, x > y and
in the right two, y > z. End of proof.
This proof is written in English, not in symbolic notation, and it refers to a particular
mental representation of the structure in question (the usual ordering of the real numbers).
(b) Symbolic Proof This proof is due to David Gries (private communication) and is in the
format advocated in [Gries and Schneider, 1993] . The proof is based on these principles:
P.1 (Contrapositive) The equivalence of P ⇒ Q and ¬Q ⇒ ¬P .
P.2 (DeMorgan) The equivalence of ¬(P ∨ Q) and ¬P ∧ ¬Q.
P.3 The equivalence in any totally ordered set of ¬(x > y) and x ≤ y.
In this proof, “¬” denotes negation.

90

contents
Proof:

wordlist

index

(x > z) ⇒ ((x > y) ∨ (y > z))
⇔ by P.1
¬ ((x > y) ∨ (y > z)) ⇒ ¬(x > z)
⇔ by P.2
(¬(x > y) ∧ ¬(y > z)) ⇒ ¬(x > z)
⇔ by P.3 three times
((x ≤ y) ∧ (y ≤ z)) ⇒ (x ≤ z)

which is true by the transitive law.
This proof involves symbol manipulation using logical rules and has the advantage
that it is easy to check mechanically. It also shows that the proof works in a wider context
(any totally ordered set).
(c) Another conceptual proof The conceptual proof given in (a) provides a geometric
visualization of the situation required by the hypothesis of the theorem, and this
visualization makes the truth of the theorem obvious. But there is a sense of
“conceptual”, related to the idea of conceptual deﬁnition given under elementary, that
does not have a geometric component. This is the idea that a proof is conceptual if it
appeals to concepts and theorems at a high level of abstraction.
To a person familiar with the elementary rules of ﬁrst order logic, the symbolic proof
just given becomes a conceptual proof (this happened to me): “Why, in a totally ordered
set that statement is nothing but the contrapositive of transitivity!” Although this
statement is merely a summary of the symbolic proof, it is enough to enable anyone
conversant with simple logic to generate the symbolic proof. Furthermore, in my case at
least, it provides an aha experience.
Citations (Rub89.421), (BieGro86.425).

91

contents

wordlist

index

conceptual blend A cognitive structure (concept, mental representation or imagined

situation) is a conceptual blend if it consists of features from two diﬀerent cognitive
structures, with some part of one structure merged with or identiﬁed with an isomorphic
part of the other structure.
Example 1 An experienced mathematician may conceive of the function x → x2 as
represented by the parabola that is its graph, or as a machine that given x produces its
square (one may even have a particular algorithm in mind). In visualizing the parabola,
she may visualize a geometric object, a curve of a certain shape placed in the plane in a
certain way, and she will keep in mind that its points are parametrized (or identiﬁed with)
the set {(x, y) | y = x2 }. The cognitive structure involved with the machine picture will
include the set of paired inputs and outputs of the machine. Her complex mental
representation of the functions includes all these objects, but in particular the pairs that
parametrize the parabola and the input-output pairs of the machine are visualized as
being the same pairs, the elements of the set {(x, y) | y = x2 }.
Example 2 A monk starts at dawn at the bottom of a mountain and goes up a path
to the top, arriving there at dusk. The next morning at dawn he begins to go down the
path, arriving at dusk at the place he started from on the previous day. Prove that there
is a time of day at which he is at the same place on the path on both days. Proof:
Envision both events occurring on the same day, with a monk starting at the top and
another starting at the bottom and doing the same thing the monk did on diﬀerent days.
They are on the same path, so they must meet each other. The time at which they meet is
the time required. This visualization of both events occurring on the same day is an
example of conceptual blending.
Analogies and metaphors are types of conceptual blends. See also identify.
Remark 1 A conceptual blend is like an amalgamated sum or a pushout.

References Conceptual blending, analogical mappings, metaphors and metonymies (these
words overlap and diﬀerent authors do not agree on their deﬁnitions) are hot topics in
current cognitive science. These ideas have only just begun to be applied to the study of
mathematical learning. Some of these references are general; those by Presmeg and by
Lakoﬀ and N´nez are speciﬁc to mathematics: [Lakoﬀ, 1986] , [Fauconnier, 1997] ,
u˜
92

contents

wordlist

index

[Presmeg, 1997b] , [Lakoﬀ and N´nez, 1997] , [Lakoﬀ and N´nez, 1998] , [Lakoﬀ and
u˜
u˜
N´nez, 2000] , [Katz et al., 1998] .
u˜
Acknowledgments The monk example is adapted from [Fauconnier, 1997] , page 151.

93

contents

wordlist

index

conditional assertion A conditional assertion A ⇒ B (pronounced A implies B) is an
assertion formed from two assertions A and B, satisfying the following truth table:
A B A⇒B
T T
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
F
F
T
The operation “⇒” is called implication. Warning: a conditional assertion is often
called an implication, as well. Citation: (Ros91.6).
In the mathematical register, A ⇒ B may be written in many ways. Here are some
examples where A is “4 divides n” and B is “2 divides n”.
a) If 4 divides n, then 2 divides n. Citation: (Bur94.24), (HenLarMarWoo94.213),
(VanLutPrz77.435).
b) 2 divides n if 4 divides n. Citation: (Bru93.370)
c) 4 divides n only if 2 divides n. Citation: (HofTer94.630), (Str89.107).
d) 4 divides n implies 2 divides n. Citation: (Kra95.40), (Wit90.144).
e) Suppose [or Assume] 4 divides n. Then 2 divides n.
Citations (Cop93.480), (GraEntSze94.665).
f) Let 4 divide n. Then 2 divides n. Citation: (Ros93.208)
g) A necessary condition for 4 to divide n is that 2 divide n.Citation:
(HenLarMarWoo94.213), (BuhEisGraWri94.513).
h) A suﬃcient condition for 2 to divide n is that 4 divide n. Citation:
(HenLarMarWoo94.213), (BuhEisGraWri94.513).
Remark 1 The word “if” in sentences (a), (b), and (1) can be replaced by “when”
or (except for (1)) by “whenever”. Note that if has other uses, discussed under that word.
The situation with let, assume, and suppose are discussed further in those entries.
Remark 2 Many other English constructions may be translated into (are equivalent
to) conditional assertions. For example the statement P ⇔“Every cyclic group is
commutative” is equivalent to the statement “If G is cyclic then it is Abelian” (in a

94

contents

wordlist

index

context where G is of type “group”). But the statement P is not itself a conditional
assertion. See universal quantiﬁer.
Diﬃculties Students have many diﬃculties with implication, mostly because of semantic
contamination with the usual way “if . . . then” and “implies” are used in ordinary
English. Some aspects of this are described here.
In the ﬁrst place, one way conditional sentences are used in ordinary English is to
give rules. The eﬀect is that “If P then Q means “P if and only if Q”.
Example 1 The sentence
“If you eat your dinner, you may have dessert.”
means in ordinary discourse that if you don’t eat your dinner you may not have dessert. A
child told this presumably interprets the statement as being in some sort of command
mode, with diﬀerent rules about “if” than in other types of sentences (compare the
diﬀerences in the use of “if” in deﬁnitions and in theorems in the mathematical register.)
Perhaps as a consequence of the way they are used in ordinary English, students often
take conditional sentences to be equivalences or even simply read them backward.
Example 2 A student may remember the fact “If a function is diﬀerentiable then it
is continuous” as saying that being diﬀerentiable and being continuous are the same thing,
or simply may remember it backward.
Example 3 When asked to prove P ⇒ Q, some students assume Q and deduce P .
This may have to do with the way students are taught to solve equations in high school.
Remark 3 I would recommend that in expository writing about mathematics, if you
state a mathematical fact in the form of a conditional assertion, you always follow it
immediately by a statement explaining whether its converse is true, false or unknown.
Remark 4 Students have particularly diﬃculty with only if and vacuous implication,
discussed under those headings. See also false symmetry.
References The sentence about dessert is from [Epp, 1995] . An analysis of conditionals
in ordinary English is given by McCawley [1993] , section 3.4 and Chapter 15. Other more
technical approaches are in Section 2.1 of [Kamp and Reyle, 1993] and in Chapter 6 of
[Chierchia and McConnell-Ginet, 1990] .
95

contents

wordlist

index

conjunction A conjunction is an assertion P formed from two assertions A and B with

the property that P is true if and only if A and B are true. It is deﬁned by the following
truth table:
A B
P
T T
T
F
T
F
F
T
F
F
F
F
Do not confuse this usage of “conjunction” with the part of speech called “conjunction”.
Here, a conjunction is a whole sentence.
In the mathematical register, the conjunction of two assertions is usually signaled by
connecting the two assertions with and. Examples are given under and.

96

contents

wordlist

connective In mathematical logic, a connective or logical connective is a binary

index

operation that takes pairs of assertions to an assertion. The connectives discussed in this
text are and, equivalent, imply, and or. Note that some of these connectives are
represented in English by conjunctions and others in more complex ways.
Remark 1 Unary operations such as not are sometimes called connectives as well.

97

contents

wordlist

consequent In a conditional assertion of the form P ⇒ Q, Q is the consequent.

98

index

contents

wordlist

index

consider The command “Consider . . . ” introduces a (usually variable) mathematical
object together with notation for the objects and perhaps some of its structure.
Citation (Mea93.387), (Mol97.531).

99

contents

wordlist

index

constructivism In mathematics education, this is the name given to the point of view

that a student constructs her understanding of mathematical concepts from her
experience, her struggles with the ideas, and what instructors and fellow students say. It
is in opposition to the idea that the instructor in some sense pours knowledge into the
student.
Of course, all I have given here are metaphors. However, constructivists draw
conclusions concerning teaching and learning from their point of view.
Remark 1 Constructivism is the name of a point of view in the philosophy of
mathematics as well, but there is no connection between the two ideas.
Remark 2 “Constructivism” as a philosophy of education may also connote other
attitudes, including the idea that scientiﬁc knowledge does not or should not have a
privileged position in teaching (or perhaps in philosophy). The remarks in the Preface on
page 10 about the standard interpretation of discourse in the mathematical register diﬀer
from this view.

References A brief description of constructivism in mathematics education may be found
in [Selden and Selden, 1997] . Two very diﬀerent expositions of constructivism are given
by Ernest [1998] and Hersh [1997b] ; these two books are reviewed in [Gold, 1999] .

100

contents

wordlist

index

contain If A and B are sets, the assertion A contains B can mean one of two things:

a) B ⊆ A.
b) B ∈ A.
A similar remark can be made about the sentence “B is contained in A.”
Remark 1 Halmos, in [Steenrod et al., 1975] , page 40, recommends using “contain”
for the membership relation and “include” for the inclusion relation. However, it appears
to me that “contain” is used far more often to mean “include”.
Citations (Fre90.705), (GucJoh90.72).

101

contents

wordlist

index

context The context of an assertion includes the interpretation currently holding of the

global identiﬁers and local identiﬁers. Deﬁnitions change the context on the ﬂy, so to
speak. An experienced reader of mathematical discourse will be aware of the meanings of
the various identiﬁers and their changes as she reads.
Example 1 Before a phrase such as “Let x = 3”, x may be known only as an integer
variable; after the phrase, it means speciﬁcally 3.
Example 2 An indeﬁnite description also changes the context.
“On the last test I used a polynomial whose derivative had four distinct
zeroes.”
After such a sentence is said or written, deﬁnite descriptions such as “that polynomial”
may refer speciﬁcally to the polynomial mentioned in the sentence just quoted.
Remark 1 The eﬀect of each statement in mathematical discourse can thus be
interpreted as a function from context to context. This is described for one particular
formalism (but not speciﬁcally for mathematical discourse) in [Chierchia and
McConnell-Ginet, 1990] , which has further references. See also [de Bruijn, 1994] ,
page 875 and [Muskens, van Benthem and Visser, 1997] .
Remark 2 The deﬁnition given here is a narrow meaning of the word “context” and
is analogous to its used in programming language semantics. (Computer scientists also
call it the “state”.) The word has a broader meaning in ordinary discourse, typically
referring to the physical or social surroundings.

102

contents

wordlist

index

context-dependent
(a) Context-dependent interpretation The interpretation of a symbolic expression is
context-dependent if it depends on the place of the expression in the sentence containing
it. The pronunciation of the expression may also vary with its place in the sentence.
Example 1 In speaking of a group G one might say both
“G is commutative.”
and
“Every odd number is an element of G.”
In the ﬁrst sentence, the reference is to the binary operation implicitly or explicitly given
in the deﬁnition of “group”, or perhaps to the whole structure, but certainly not to the set
G. In the second, the reference is to the underlying set of the structure.
Thus the meaning of the symbol G (but not in this case its pronunciation) is
context-dependent; its signiﬁcance depends on the sentence it occurs in. Observe that this
signiﬁcance does not depend on the narrow meaning of context given under that heading.
Example 2 The pronunciation of many symbolic expressions in mathematics,
particularly symbolic assertions, depends on how they are used in the sentence. The most
common way this happens is in the case of parenthetic assertions (under which examples
are given).
(b) Context-dependent syntax The symbolic language of mathematics has
context-dependent syntax in certain constructions.
Example 3 The rule for applying functions would put most functions on the left of
the argument, but the factorial notation “!” goes on the right. So how you write an
expression exhibiting the application of a function depends on what you call the function.
(If you called the factorial function F , you would presumably write F (n), not nF .)
Example 4 The notation for derivatives is context-dependent. The prime notation
can be used for functions of one variable but not for functions of more than one variable.
Similarly, the notation involving d is used for derivatives of functions of one variable; for
more than one variable one must change it to ∂.

103

contents

wordlist

index

Remark 1 The two notations in the example have diﬀerent problems in some
respects. The prime notation cannot be used for more than one variable because it would
become ambiguous. The diﬀerence between d and ∂, on the other hand, is a matter of
convention.
Remark 2 Formal languages, including those of the various forms of mathematical
logic. are generally speciﬁed by recursive deﬁnitions that deﬁne which strings of symbols
are correctly formed expressions. Such recursive deﬁnitions, called grammars, are typically
context-free, meaning roughly that any correctly formed expression of a given type can be
placed in a “slot” of that type.
The following observation is aimed at those who know something about grammars:
The remarks in Example 3 do not indicate that the symbolic language is not context-free:
One could simply have diﬀerent grammatical categories for function symbols applied on
the left, function symbols applied on the right, function symbols applied on top (like the
dot notation for derivatives), outﬁx notation, and so on. On the other hand, Example 4
produce evidence (not proof) that the symbolic language cannot be context-free, since
whether a prime or a d may be used depends on whether there are other variables
“arbitrarily elsewhere” in the expression.
References Grammars are deﬁned mathematically in [Lewis and Papadimitriou, 1998] .
Linguists on the one hand and computer scientists on the other use very diﬀerent notation
and terminology for grammars.

104

contents

wordlist

index

contrapositive The contrapositive of a conditional assertion P ⇒ Q is the statement

(not Q) ⇒ (not P ). In mathematical arguments, the conditional assertion and its
contrapositive are equivalent. In particular, to prove P ⇒ Q it is enough to prove that
(not Q) ⇒ (not P ), and once you have done that, no further argument is needed. I have
attended lectures where further argument was given, leading me to suspect that the
lecturer did not fully understand the contrapositive, but I have not discovered an instance
in print that would indicate that. See proof by contradiction.
Remark 1 The fact that a conditional assertion and its contrapositive are logically
equivalent means that a proof can be organized as follows, and in fact many proofs in
texts are organized like this:
a) Theorem: P implies Q.
b) Assume not Q.
c) Argument that not P follows.
d) Hence not P .
e) End of proof.
Note that the reader is given no hint as to the form of the proof; she must simply
recognize the pattern. (See pattern recognition.)

Diﬃculties In contrast to the situation in mathematical reasoning, the contrapositive of a
conditional sentence in ordinary English about everyday topics of conversation does not in
general mean the same thing as the direct sentence. This causes semantic contamination.
Example 1 The sentence
“If it rains, I will carry my umbrella.”
does not mean the same thing as
“If I don’t carry my umbrella, it won’t rain.”
McCawley [1993] , section 3.4 and Chapter 15, discusses the contrapositive and other
aspects of conditional sentences in English. See also the remarks under only if.

105

contents

wordlist

index

convention A convention in mathematical discourse is notation or terminology used with

a special meaning in certain contexts or in certain ﬁelds.
Example 1 The use of if to mean “if and only if” in a deﬁnition is a convention.
This is controversial and is discussed under if.
Example 2 Constants or parameters are conventionally denoted by a, b, . . . ,
functions by f , g, . . . and variables by x, y, . . . .
Example 3 Referring to a group (or other mathematical structure) and its
underlying set by the same name is a convention.
Example 4 The meaning of sinn x is the inverse sine (arcsin) if n = −1 but the
multiplicative power for positive n (sinn x = (sin x)n ). This is a common convention in
calculus texts, usually explicit. It is not an example of context sensitivity since the n is
not in the context, it is part of the symbolic expression itself.
Remark 1 Examples 3 and 4 exhibit failure of compositionality.
Remark 2 Examples 1 through 4 diﬀer in how pervasive they are and in whether
they are made explicit or not. The convention in Example 1 is so pervasive it is almost
never mentioned (it is just beginning to be mentioned in textbooks aimed at ﬁrst courses
in abstract mathematics). That is almost, but not quite, as true of the second convention.
The third and fourth conventions are quite common but often made explicit.
Any given culture has some customs and taboos that almost no one inside the culture
is aware of, others that only some who are particularly sensitive to such issues (or who
have traveled a lot) are aware of, and still others that everyone is aware of because it is
regarded as a mark of their subculture (such as grits in the American south). One aspect
of this Handbook is an attempt to uncover features of the way mathematicians talk that
mathematicians are not generally aware of.
Example 5 Some conventions are pervasive among mathematicians but diﬀerent
conventions hold in other subjects that use mathematics. An example is the use of i to
denote the imaginary unit. In electrical engineering it is commonly denoted j instead, a
fact that many mathematicians are unaware of. I ﬁrst learned about it when a student
asked me if i was the same as j. Citation: (Poo00.4).

106

contents

wordlist

index

Example 6 Other conventions are pervasive in one country but may be diﬀerent in
another. For example, in the USA one calculates the sine function on the unit circle by
starting at (1, 0) and going counterclockwise, but in texts in other countries one may start
at (0, 1) and go clockwise. I learned of this also from students, but have no citations.
See also positive and Remark 2 under real number.

107

contents

wordlist

index

converse The converse of a conditional assertion P ⇒ Q is Q ⇒ P . Students often fall
into the trap of assuming that if the assertion is true then so is its converse; this is the
fallacy of aﬃrming the consequent. See also false symmetry.

108

contents

wordlist

index

coordinatewise A function F : A → B induces a function often called F ∗ from lists of

elements of A to lists of elements of B or from An to B n for a ﬁxed positive integer n by
deﬁning
F ∗ (a1 , . . . , an ) = (F (a1 ), . . . , F (an ))

One says that this deﬁnes F ∗ coordinatewise or componentwise.
Example 1 “In the product of two groups, multiplication is deﬁned coordinatewise.”
One can say that assertions are deﬁned coordinatewise, as well. (See Remark 1 under
assertion.)
Example 2 “The product of two ordered sets becomes an ordered set by deﬁning the
order relation coordinatewise.”
Citations (BriPre92.146), (Kop88.93), (Bla79.122).

109

contents

wordlist

index

copy When one is discussing a mathematical structure, say the ring of integers, one

sometimes refers to “a copy of the integers”, meaning a structure isomorphic to the
integers. This carries the connotation that there is a preferred copy of the mathematical
object called the integers (see speciﬁc mathematical object); I suspect that some who use
this terminology don’t believe in such preferred copies. Our language, with its deﬁnite
descriptions and proper nouns, is not particularly suited to discussing things deﬁned
unique up to isomorphism.
Citations (Tal90.9),(DowKni92.546).

110

contents

wordlist

index

coreference Coreference is the use of a word or phrase in discourse to denote the same

thing as some other word or phrase. In English, third person pronouns (he, she, it, they),
demonstratives (this, that, these, those), and the word “do” are commonly used for
coreference.
Linguists have formulated some of the rules that govern the use of coreference in
English. Typically, the rules produce some syntactic restrictions on what can be referred
to, which in some cases determine the reference uniquely, but in many other cases the
meaning must be left ambiguous to be disambiguated (if possible) by the situation in
which it is uttered. This is not the place to describe those rules; a native English speaker
has the rules built into his or her language understanding mechanism. I will give a few
examples.
Example 1 In the sentence
“Assume, for the moment, that a = 0. Then the equation ax + by + cz + d = 0
can be rewritten as a(x + (d/a)) + by + cz = 0. But this is a point-normal form
of the plane passing through the point (−d/a, 0, 0) and having n = (a, b, c) as a
normal.”
from citation (Ant84.121), “this” refers to the preceding equation, not the equation before
it,
Example 2 Consider the sentences, “Oscar kissed his mother” and “He kissed
Oscar’s mother”. In the ﬁrst one we assume Oscar kissed his own mother. In the second,
we assumed the person doing the kissing did not kiss his own mother. In the ﬁrst case,
and perhaps in the second, the circumstances under which the sentences were uttered
could alter these assumptions. This shows that both the English syntax and the
circumstances constrain how the sentences are interpreted.
Example 3 Some years ago the following question appeared in my classnotes [Wells,
1997] :
“Cornwall Computernut has 5 computers with hard disk drives and one
without. Of these, several have speech synthesizers, including the one without
hard disk. Several have Pascal, including those with synthesizers. Exactly 3 of
the computers with hard disk have Pascal. How many have Pascal?”
111

contents

wordlist

index

Some students did not understand that the phrase “including those with synthesizers”
meant “including all those with synthesizers” (this misunderstanding removes the
uniqueness of the answer). They were a minority, but some of them were quite clear that
“including those with synthesizers” means some or all of those with synthesizers have
Pascal; if I wanted to require that all of them have Pascal I would have to say “including
all those with synthesizers”. A survey of a later class elicited a similar minority response.
I do not know of any literature in linguistics that addresses this speciﬁc point.
References needed.
Citation (Kan97.260).
See also respectively.
Remark 1 The phenomenon of coreference is also called “anaphora”, a word
borrowed from rhetoric which originally meant something else. Many (but not all) linguists
restrict “anaphora” to backward coreference and use “cataphora” for forward reference.
References The place to start in reading about the approach of modern linguistics to
anaphora is probably [Fiengo and May, 1996] , where I found the Oscar sentences of
Example 2. See also [Kamp and Reyle, 1993] , pp. 66ﬀ, [Chierchia, 1995] , [McCarthy,
1994] , and [Halliday, 1994] , pp. 312ﬀ.

112

contents

wordlist

corollary A corollary of a theorem is a fact that follows easily from the theorem.

index

Citations (BleMccSel98.535), (Bur94.24), (JanHam90.300), (Niv56.41) (corollary of
two theorems).
Remark 1 “Easily” may mean by straightforward calculations, as in
(BleMccSel98.535), where some of the necessary calculations occur in the proof of the
theorem, and in (Niv56.41), or the corollary may be simply an instance of the theorem as
in (JanHam90.300).

113

contents

wordlist

index

counterexample A counterexample to an universally quantiﬁed assertion is an instance
of the assertion for which it is false.
Example 1 A counterexample to the assertion
“For all real x, x2 > x”
is x = 1/2. See also example,

Diﬃculties Students sometimes attempt to prove a universally quantiﬁed statement by
giving an example. They sometimes speciﬁcally complain that the instructor uses
examples, so why can’t they? There are several possibilities for why this happens:
a) The students have seen the instructor use examples and don’t have a strong
sensitivity to when one is carrying out a proof and when one is engaged in an
illuminatory discussion.
b) The student has seen counterexamples used to disprove universal statements, and
expects to be able to prove such statements by a kind of false symmetry.
c) The student is thinking of the example as generic and is carrying out a kind of
universal generalization.
d) The problem may have expressed the universal quantiﬁer as in Example 1 under
indeﬁnite article.
Acknowledgments Atish Bagchi, Michael Barr.

114

contents

wordlist

index

covert curriculum The covert curriculum (or hidden curriculum) consists of the skills

we expect math students to acquire without our teaching the skills or even mentioning
them. What is in the covert curriculum depends to some extent on the teacher, but for
students in higher level math courses it generally includes the ability to read mathematical
texts and follow mathematical proofs. (We do try to give the students explicit instruction,
usually somewhat oﬀhandedly, in how to come up with a proof, but generally not in how
to read and follow one.) This particular skill is one that this Handbook is trying to make
overt. There are undoubtedly other things in the covert curriculum as well.

References [Vallance, 1977] .
Acknowledgments I learned about this from Annie Selden. Christine Browning provided
references.

115

contents

wordlist

dash See prime.

116

index

contents

wordlist

index

deﬁned in A function F is deﬁned in, deﬁned on or deﬁned over a set A if its domain
is A.
Citations (BelEvaHum79.121), (HasRee93.772), (RicRic93.475).

117

contents

wordlist

deﬁning condition See setbuilder notation.

118

index

contents

wordlist

deﬁning equation See function.

119

index

contents

wordlist

index

deﬁnite article The word “the” is called the deﬁnite article. It is used in forming
deﬁnite descriptions.

(1) The deﬁnite article as universal quantiﬁer
Both the indeﬁnite article and the deﬁnite article can have the force of universal
quantiﬁcation. Examples are given under universal quantiﬁer.
(2) The deﬁnite article and setbuilder notation
A set {x | P (x)} in setbuilder notation is often described with a phrase such as “the set
of x such that P (x)”. In particular, this set is the set of all x for which P (x) is true.
Example 1 The set described by the phrase “the set of even integers” is the set of
all even integers.
Diﬃculties Consider this test question:
“Let E be the set of even integers. Show that the sum of any two elements
of E is even.”
Students have given answers such as this:
“Let E = {2, 4, 6}. Then 2 + 4 = 6, 2 + 6 = 8 and 4 + 6 = 10, and 6, 8 and 10
are all even.”
This misinterpretation has been made in my classes by both native and non-native
speakers of English.
(3) Deﬁnite article in deﬁnitions
The deﬁniendum of a deﬁnition may be a deﬁnite description.
Example 2
“The sum of vectors (a1 , a2 ) and (b1 , b2 ) is (a1 + b1 , a2 + b2 ).”
I have known this to cause diﬃculty with students in the case that the deﬁnition is not
clearly marked as such. The deﬁnite description makes the student believe that he or she
should know what it refers to. In the assertion in Example 2, the only clue that it is a
deﬁnition is that “sum” is in boldface. This is discussed further under deﬁnition.
Citations (Cur93.790), (Gal94.352).
120

contents

wordlist

index

deﬁnite description If [N] is a noun phrase, “the [N]” is a deﬁnite description or a

deﬁnite noun phrase; it refers to the object (presumed uniquely determined) described by
[N]. The assumption is that the object referred to is already known to the speaker and the
listener or has already been referred to.
Example 1 If you overheard a person at the blackboard say to someone
“The function is diﬀerentiable, so . . . ”
you would probably assume that that person is referring to a function that speaker and
listener both already know about. It may be a speciﬁc function, but it does not have to
be; they could be in the middle of a proof of a theorem about functions of a certain type
and “the function” could be a variable function that they named for the purposes of
proving the theorem.
This example shows that in the mathematical register, whether a description is
deﬁnite or indeﬁnite is independent of whether the identiﬁer involved is determinate or
variate.
Example 2
“Let G be a group. Show that the identity of G is idempotent.”
This example shows that the presumptive uniquely determined object (“the identity”) can
depend on a parameter, in this case G. As another example, in the phrase “the equation
of a plane” the parameter is the plane. See context.
Citation (Ant84.121).

References See [Kamp and Reyle, 1993] , Section 3.7.5.
I need a reference to a discussion of deﬁnite and indeﬁnite at the expository level.
References needed.

121

contents

wordlist

index

deﬁnition [1] (Mathematical deﬁnitions)

A mathematical deﬁnition prescribes the meaning of a symbol, word, or phrase,
called the deﬁniendum here, as a mathematical object satisfying all of a set of
requirements. The deﬁniendum will be either an adjective that denotes a property that
mathematical objects may have, or it may be a noun that denotes a type of mathematical
object with certain properties. (Mathematical texts sometimes deﬁne other parts of
speech, but that possibility will be ignored here.)
Remark 1 A mathematical deﬁnition is quite diﬀerent from other sorts of
deﬁnitions, a fact that is not widely appreciated by mathematicians. The diﬀerences are
dicussed under concept and under dictionary deﬁnition.
(1) Syntax of deﬁnitions
Deﬁnitions of nouns and of adjectives have similar syntax, with some variations. Every
deﬁnition will contain a deﬁniendum and a deﬁniens, which is a set of properties an
object must have to be correctly named by the deﬁniendum. The deﬁniens may be
syntactically scattered throughout the deﬁnition. In particular, a deﬁnition may have any
or all of the following structures:
1. A precondition, occurring before the deﬁniendum, which typically gives the type of
structure that the deﬁnition applies to and may give other conditions.
2. A deﬁning phrase, a list of conditions on the deﬁniendum occurring in the same
sentence as the deﬁniendum.
3. A postcondition, required conditions occurring after the ostensible deﬁnition which
appear to be an afterthought. The postcondition commonly begins with “where”
and some examples are given under that heading.
Example 1 One can deﬁne “domain” in point set topology directly by saying
“A domain is a connected open set.”
(See be.) The deﬁniendum is “domain” and the deﬁning phrase (which constitutes the
entire deﬁniens) is “is a connected open set”. Similarly:
“‘An even integer is an integer that is divisible by 2.”

122

contents

wordlist

index

Citation: (Bel75.476), (BleMccSel98.529). In both these cases the deﬁniendum is the
subject of the sentence.
Remark 2 The deﬁnition of “domain” in Example 1 involves a suppressed
parameter, namely the ambient topological space.
It is more common to word the deﬁnition using “if”, in a conditional sentence. In this
case the subject of the sentence is a noun phrase giving the type of object being deﬁned
and the deﬁniendum is given in the predicate of the conclusion of the conditional sentence.
The subject of the sentence may be a deﬁnite noun phrase or an indeﬁnite one. The
conditional sentence, like any such, may be worded with hypothesis ﬁrst or with conclusion
ﬁrst. All this is illustrated in the list of examples following, which is not exhaustive.
1. [Indeﬁnite noun phrase, deﬁniendum with no proper name.] A set is a domain if it is
open and connected. Or: If a set is open and connected, it is a domain. Similarly:
An integer is even if it is divisible by 2. Citation: (Fre90.705).
2. [Indeﬁnite noun phrase, deﬁniendum given proper name.] A set D is a domain if D
is open and connected. An integer n is even if n is divisible by 2. (In both cases and
in similar named cases below the second occurrence of the name could be replaced
by “it”.) Citation: (Gie71.37), (JonPea00.95).
3. [Deﬁnite noun phrase.] The set D is a domain if D is open and connected. Similarly:
The integer n is even if n is divisible by 2. Using the deﬁnite form is much less
common than using the indeﬁnite form, and seems to occur most often in the older
literature. It requires that the deﬁniendum be given a proper name. Citation:
(App71.56), (Bae55.16).
4. [Using “let” in a precondition.] Let D be a set. Then D is a domain if it is open and
connected. Similarly: Let n be an integer. Then n is even if it is divisible by 2.
“Let” is commonly used to establish notation.
5. [Using “if” in a precondition] If n is an integer, then it is even if it is divisible by 2.
Citation: (Bel75.476).
Remark 3 All the deﬁnitions are given with the deﬁniendum marked by being in
boldface. Many other forms of marking are possible; see marking below.
123

contents

wordlist

index

A symbolic expression may be deﬁned by using phrases similar to those just given.
Example 2 “For an integer n, σ(n) is the sum of the positive divisors of n.”
Sometimes “deﬁne” is used instead of “let” in the sense of section (a) under let.
Example 3
“Deﬁne f (x) to be x2 + 1. What is the derivative of f ?”
Students sometimes wonder what they are supposed to do when they read a sentence
such as “Deﬁne f (x) to be x2 + 1”, since they take it as a command. Citation:
(KloAleLar93.757), (Kon00.902).
Other ways of giving a deﬁnition use call, put, and set, usually in the imperative the
way “deﬁne” is used in Example 3. See also say. Many other forms of syntax are used, but
most of them are either a direct deﬁnition such as in Example 1 or a deﬁnition using a
conditional, with variations in syntax that are typical of academic prose.
Remark 4 Some authors have begun using “if and only if” in deﬁnitions instead of
“if”. More about this in the entry for if. See also convention and let.
(2) Marking
The deﬁniendum may be put in italics or quotes or some other typeface instead of
boldface, or may not be marked at all. When it is not marked, one often uses signaling
phrases such as “is deﬁned to be”, “is said to be”, or “is called”, to indicate what the
deﬁniendum is. A deﬁnition may be delineated, with a label “Definition”.
Citations (Gie71.37), (IpsMey95.905) (formally marked as deﬁnition);
(LewPap98.20), where it is signaled as deﬁnition by the sentence beginning “We call two
sets . . . ”; (Epp95.534) and (Fra82.41), where the only clue that it is a deﬁnition is that
the word is in boldface; (BleMccSel98.529), where the clue is that the word is in italics.
Remark 5 Words and phrases such as “We have deﬁned. . . ” or “recall” may serve as
a valuable clue that what follows is not a deﬁnition.
Remark 6 Some object to the use of boldface to mark the deﬁniendum. I know of no
such object in print; this observation is based on my experience with referees.

124

contents

wordlist

index

(3) Deﬁnitions and concepts
The deﬁnition of a concept has a special logical status. It is the fundamental fact about
the concept from which all other facts about it must ultimately be deduced. I have found
this special logical status one of the most diﬃcult concepts to get across to students
beginning to study abstract mathematics (in a ﬁrst course in linear algebra, discrete
mathematics or abstract algebra). There is more about this under concept, mental
representation, rewrite using deﬁnitions and trivial. See also unwind.
There is of course a connection among the following three ideas:
a) The uses of the word “function” in the mathematical register.
b) The mathematical deﬁnition of function.
c) The mental representation associated with “function”.
To explicate this connection (for all mathematical concepts, not just “function”) is a
central problem in the philosophy of mathematics.
References [Tall and Vinner, 1981] , [Vinner, 1992] , [Vinner and Dreyfus, 1989] , [Wood,
1999] .
(4) Deﬁnition as presentation of a structure
A mathematical deﬁnition of a concept is spare by intent: it will generally provide a
minimal or nearly minimal list of data and of relationships that must hold among the data
that imply all the other data and relationships belonging to the concept. Data or
properties that follow from other given items are generally not included intentionally in a
deﬁnition (some exceptions are noted under redundant) and when they are the author
may feel obligated to point out the redundancy.
As a result, a mathematical deﬁnition hides the richness and complexity of the
concept and as such may not be of much use to students who want to understand it (gain
a rich mental representation of it). Moreover, a person not used to the minimal nature of
a mathematical deﬁnition may gain an exaggerated idea of the importance of the items
that the deﬁnition does include. See also fundamentalist.

125

contents

wordlist

index

deﬁnition [2] (Dictionary deﬁnition) An explanation, typically in a dictionary or glossary,

of the meaning of a word. This is not the same as a mathematical deﬁnition (meaning (1)
above). To distinguish, this Handbook will refer to a deﬁnition of the sort discussed here
as a dictionary deﬁnition. The entries in this Handbook are (for the most part)
dictionary deﬁnitions.
Example 1 The entry for “function” given in this Handbook describes how the word
“function” and related words are used in the mathematical register. The deﬁnition of
function given in a typical mathematical textbook (perhaps as a set of ordered pairs with
certain properties) speciﬁed what kind of mathematical object is to be called a function.
See Remark 2 under free variable for a discussion of this issue in a particular case.

Acknowledgments Atish Bagchi

126

contents

wordlist

deﬁnition by cases . See cases.

127

index

contents

wordlist

deﬁnition proper See mathematical deﬁnition.

128

index

contents

wordlist

index

degenerate An example of a type of mathematical structure is in some disciplines called

degenerate if either (i) some parts of the structure that are distinct in the deﬁnition of
that type coincide (I call this collapsing), or (ii) some parameter is zero. The converse,
that if a structure satisﬁes (i) or (ii) then it is called degenerate, is far from being correct;
the word seems to be limited to certain speciﬁc disciplines.
Example 1 A line segment can be seen as a degenerate isosceles triangle – two sides
coincide and the third has zero length. Note that this ﬁts both (i) and (ii).
Example 2 The concept of degenerate critical point has a technical deﬁnition (a
certain matrix has zero determinant) and is responsible for a sizeable fraction of the
occurrences I found on JSTOR. A small perturbation turns a degenerate critical point into
several critical points, so this can be thought of as a kind of collapsing.
Remark 1 The deﬁnition of degenerate given here is based on reading about thirty
examples of the use of the word on JSTOR. Sometimes the word has a mathematical
deﬁnition speciﬁc to the particular discipline of the paper and sometimes it appears to be
used informally.
Citations (Ran95.641), (Rot81.12).

Acknowledgments Robin Chapman.

129

contents

wordlist

delimiter Delimiters consist of pairs of symbols used in the symbolic language for

index

grouping. A pair of delimiters may or may not have signiﬁcance beyond grouping; if they
do not they are bare delimiters. The three types of characters used as bare delimiters in
mathematics are parentheses, brackets, and braces. Typically, parentheses are the
standard delimiters in symbolic expressions. Brackets or braces may be used to aid
parsing when parentheses are nested or when the expression to be enclosed is large, but
brackets and braces are occasionally used alone as bare delimiters as well.
n
Example 1 The expression (x + 1)2 − (x − 2)2 contains nested parentheses and
n
might alternatively be written as (x + 1)2 − (x − 2)2 .
Parentheses, brackets and braces may also be used with additional signiﬁcance; such
uses are discussed with examples under their own headings.
Other symbols also are used to carry meaning and also act as delimiters, such as
angle brackets, the symbols for absolute value and norm, or the integral sign and its
matching dx.
b
Example 2 The integral sign and the dx in the expression a x2 + 1 dx delimit the
integrand and also provide other information.
Citations (DarGof70.729), (Sta70a.774), (Sta70b.884), (Tew70.730).

130

contents

wordlist

index

delineated A piece of text is delineated if it is set oﬀ typographically, perhaps as a
display or by being enclosed in a rectangle. Delineated text is often labeled, as well.
Example 1
“ Theorem An integer n that is divisible by 4 is divisible by 2.”
The label is “Theorem”.

131

contents

wordlist

index

denote To say that an expression A denotes a speciﬁc object B means that A refers to B;

in a sentence containing a description of B, the description can be replaced by A and the
truth value of the sentence remains the same.
Example 1 The symbol π denotes the ratio of the circumference of a circle to its
diameter.
Citations (RabGil93.168), (Cur93.790).
Remark 1 [Krantz, 1997] , page 38, objects to the use of “denote” when the
expression being introduced refers (in my terminology) to a variable mathematical object,
for example in a sentence such as “Let f denote a continuous function”.
Remark 2 Some authors also object to the usage exempliﬁed by “the ratio of the
circumference of a circle to its diameter is denoted π”; they say it should be “denoted by”.
Citation (Pow74.264), (Str93.3), (Epp95.76).

132

contents

wordlist

index

denying the hypothesis The fallacy of deducing not Q from P ⇒ Q and not P . Also
called inverse error.
Example 1 You are asked about a certain subgroup H of a non-abelian group G.
You “know” H is not normal in G because you know the theorem that if a group is
Abelian, then every subgroup is normal in it.
In contrast, consider Example 1 under conditional assertion.

133

contents

wordlist

index

dependent variable notation This is a method of referring to a function that uses the

pattern
“Let y be a function of x.”
where x is an identiﬁer for the input and y is an identiﬁer for the output. In this case, one
says that y is dependent on x. The rule for the function is typically not given.
In this usage, the value of the unnamed function at x is sometimes denoted y(x).
Note that this does not qualify as structural notation since the notation does not
determine the function. Citation: (Kno81.235), (Sto95.614).

134

contents

wordlist

index

determinate A free identiﬁer is determinate if it refers to a speciﬁc mathematical object.
Example 1 The symbol “3” is determinate; it refers to the unique integer 3. But see
Remark 1 under mathematical object.
An extended discussion of determinate and variate identiﬁers may be found under
variate.

135

contents

wordlist

index

discourse Connected meaningful speech or writing. Connected meaningful writing is also
called text.
Discourse analysis is the name for the branch of linguistics that studies how one
extracts meaning from sequences of sentences in natural language. [Kamp and Reyle,
1993] provides a mathematical model that may explain how people extract logic from
connected discourse, but it does not mention the special nature of mathematical
exposition. A shorter introduction to discourse analysis is [van Eijck and Kamp, 1997] .

136

contents

wordlist

index

disjoint Two sets are disjoint if their intersection is empty.
Example 1 “{1, 2} and {3, 4, 5} are disjoint.”
The word may be used with more than two sets, as well:
Example 2 “Let F be a family of disjoint sets.”
Example 3 “Let A, B and C be disjoint sets.”
Citation (Fre90.715), (Oxt77.155).
Diﬃculties Students sometimes say things such as: “Each set in a partition is disjoint”.
This is an example of a missing relational argument (see Section (b) under behaviors).

137

contents

wordlist

index

disjunction A disjunction is an assertion P formed from two assertions A and B with the
property that P is true if and only if at least one A and B is true. It is deﬁned by the
following truth table:
A B
P
T T
T
T
T F
F T
T
F
F F
In the mathematical register, the disjunction of two assertions is usually signaled by
connecting the two assertions with “or”. Diﬃculties with disjunctions are discussed under
or.

138

contents

wordlist

disjunctive deﬁnition See cases.

139

index

contents

wordlist

index

display A symbolic expression is displayed if it is put on a line by itself. Displays are

usually centered. The word “displayed” is usually used only for symbolic expressions. See
delineated.

140

contents

wordlist

index

distinct When several new identiﬁers are introduced at once, the word distinct is used to
require that no two of them can have the same value.
Example 1 “Let m and n be distinct integers.”
This means that in the following argument, one can assume that m = n.

Diﬃculties Students may not understand that without a word such as “distinct”, the
variables may indeed have the same value. Thus
“Let m and n be integers.”
allows m = n. In [Rota, 1996] , page 19, it is reported that E. H. Moore was suﬃciently
bothered by this phenomenon to say,
“Let m be an integer and let n be an integer.”
Citation (KloAleLar93.758), (Her64.2), (Mar92.739).

141

contents

wordlist

index

distributive plural The use of a plural as the subject of a sentence in such a way that

the predicate applies individually to each item referred to in the subject.
Example 1 “The multiples of 4 are even.” (or “All the multiples of 4 are even” – see
universal quantiﬁer.)
This phenomenon is given a theoretical treatment in [Kamp and Reyle, 1993] , pages
320ﬀ. See also collective plural and each.

142

contents

wordlist

index

divide
(a) Divides for integers An integer m divides an integer n (or: m is a divisor or factor of
n) if there is an integer q for which n = qm. Some authors require that q be uniquely
determined, which has the eﬀect of implying that no integer divides 0. (0 does not divide
any other integer in any case.) This deﬁnition, with or without the requirement for
uniqueness, appears to be standard in texts in discrete mathematics and number theory.
(b) Divides for commutative rings If a and b are elements of a commutative ring R, then
a divides b if there is an element c of R with the property that b = ac. This appears to be
the standard deﬁnition in texts in abstract algebra. I am not aware of any such text that
requires uniqueness of c.
Of course, the second meaning is a generalization of the ﬁrst one. I have known this
to cause people to assert that every nonzero integer divides every integer, which of course
is true in the second meaning, taking the commutative ring to be the ring of rationals or
reals.
Acknowledgments John S. Baltutis.

143

contents

wordlist

index

domain The domain of a function must be a set and may be named in any way that sets

are named. The domain is frequently left unspeciﬁed. It may be possible to deduce it
from what is stated; in particular, in cases where the rule of the function is a symbolic
expression the domain may be implicitly or explicitly assumed to be the set of all values
for which the expression is deﬁned.
Citation (Sto95.614).
The following phrases may be used to state that a set S is the domain of a function f :
a) f is a function with domain S. Citation: (Fis82.445).
b) domf = S. Citation: (Fis82.445).
c) f is a function on S. Citation: (Bar96.626).
d) f : S → T . This is read “f is a function from S to T ” if it is an independent clause
and “f from S to T ” if it is parenthetic. This expression also says that the
codomain of f is T . Citation: (Thi53.260).
See also deﬁned in.
For most authors, a function must be deﬁned at every element of the domain, if the
domain is speciﬁed. A partial function is a mathematical object deﬁned in the same way
as a function except for the requirement that it be deﬁned for every element of the domain.
Remark 1 The word “domain” is also used in topology (connected open set) and in
computing (lattice satisfying various conditions) with meanings unrelated to the concept
of domain of a function (or to each other). See multiple meanings.

144

contents

wordlist

dummy variable Same as bound variable.

145

index

contents

wordlist

index

each Generally can be used in the same way as all, every, and any to form a universal

quantiﬁer.
Example 1
“Each multiple of 4 is even.”
Remark 1 It appears to me that this direct use of “each” is uncommon. When it is
used this way, it always indicates a distributive plural, in contrast to all.
“Each” is more commonly used before a noun that is the object of a preposition,
especially after “for”, to have the same eﬀect as a distributive plural.
Example 2 “For each even number n there is an integer k for which n = 2k.”
Example 3 “A binary operation ∗ on a set is a rule that assigns to each ordered pair
of elements of the set some element of the set.” (from [Fraleigh, 1982] , page 11).
Example 4 Some students do not understand a postposited “each” as in the
sentence below.
“Five students have two pencils each.”
This usage occurs in combinatorics, for example.
Citations (Bri93.782), (DorHoh78.166), (JacTho90.71).

146

contents

wordlist

index

element If S is a set, the expression “x ∈ S” is pronounced in English in any of the

following ways:
a) “x is in S”. Citation: (Epp95.534), (Fis82.445).
b) “x is an element of S” [or ”“in S”]. Citation: (Her64.2), (Kra95.40), (Sen90.330).
c) “x is a member of S”. Citation: (BelBluLewRos66.48).
d) “S contains x” or “x is contained in S”. Citation: (Fre90.705), (DevDur91.222).
Remark 1 Sentence (d) could also mean x is contained in S as a subset. See contain.
Remark 2 A common myth among students is that there are two kinds of
mathematical objects: “sets” and “elements”. This can cause confusion when they are
faced with the idea of a set being an element of a set. The word “element” is used by
experienced mathematicians only in a phrase involving both a mathematical object and a
set. In particular, being an element is not a property that some mathematical objects
have and some don’t.

Acknowledgments Atish Bagchi

147

contents

wordlist

index

elementary In everyday English, an explanation is “elementary” if it is easy and if it

makes use of facts and principles known to most people. Mathematicians use the word
“elementary” with several other meanings as well.

(a) Elementary proofs A proof of a theorem is elementary if it uses only ideas from the
same ﬁeld as the theorem. Rota [Rota, 1996] , pages 113 ﬀ., discusses the case of the
prime number theorem in depth; the ﬁrst proofs around 1900 used complex function
theory, but it was given an elementary proof much later. That proof was quite long and
complicated, not at all elementary in the non-mathematician’s sense. (A simpler one was
found much later.)
(b) Elementary deﬁnitions Mathematicians sometimes use “elementary” in another sense
whose meaning is not quite clear to me. It is apparently in opposition to conceptual. Here
are two possible deﬁnitions; we need citations to clear this up.
a) A deﬁnition of a type of mathematical structure is elementary if it involves
quantifying only over the elements of the underlying set(s) of the structure. In
particular it does not involve quantifying over sets or over functions. This is the
meaning used by Vought [1973] , page 3.
b) A deﬁnition of a type of structure is elementary if it does not make use of other
deﬁnitions at the same level of abstraction. Thus it is unwound.
Example 1 The usual deﬁnition of a topological space as a set together with a set of
subsets with certain properties can be expressed in an elementary way according to
deﬁnition (b) but not in a direct way according to deﬁnition (a). (But see the next
remark.)
Remark 1 An elementary deﬁnition in the sense of (a) is also called ﬁrst order,
because the deﬁnition can be easily translated into the language of ﬁrst order logic in a
direct way. However, by incorporating the axioms of Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory into a
ﬁrst order theory, one can presumably state most mathematical deﬁnitions in ﬁrst order
logic. How this can be done is described in Chapter 7 of [Ebbinghaus, Flum and Thomas,
1984] .

148

contents

wordlist

index

In spite of the fact that the ZF axioms are ﬁrst order, one often hears mathematicians
refer to a deﬁnition that involves quantifying over sets or over functions (as in Example 1)
as non-elementary.
Example 2 Here is a conceptual deﬁnition of a left R-module for a ring R: It is an
Abelian group M together with a homomorphism φ : R → End(M ), where End(M )
denotes the ring of endomorphisms of M .
Now here is a more elementary deﬁnition obtained by unwinding the previous one: It
is an Abelian group M together with an operation (r, m) → rm : R × M → M for which
a) 1m = m for m ∈ M , where 1 is the unit element of R.
b) r(m + n) = rm + rn for r ∈ R, m, n ∈ M .
c) (rs)m = r(sm) for r, s ∈ R, m ∈ M .
d) (r + s)m = rm + sm for r, s ∈ R, m ∈ M .
One could make this a completely elementary deﬁnition by spelling out the axioms
for an Abelian group. The resulting deﬁnition is elementary in both senses given above.
Remark 2 The conceptual deﬁnition makes the puzzling role of “left” clear in the
phrase “left R-module”. A right R-module would require a homomorphism from the
opposite ring of R to End(M ). On the other hand, computations on elements of the
module will require knowing the laws spelled out in the elementary deﬁnition.
The concept of 2-category is given both an elementary and a conceptual deﬁnition in
[Barr and Wells, 1995] , Section 4.8.
Acknowledgments Michael Barr and Colin McLarty.

149

contents

wordlist

index

empty set The empty set is the unique set with no elements. It is denoted by the

symbols ∅ or { }.
Citations (HenLarMarWoo94.213), (Bry93.42), (Ros87.342).
Remark 1 The symbol ∅ for the empty set is not the Greek letter φ (phi). I
remember reading many years ago that the person who invented the symbol meant it to
be a circle with a slash through it, but both [Knuth, 1986] (page 128) and [Schwartzman,
1994] say it is a zero with a slash through it. Typographically a zero is not a circle. More
information about this would be appreciated. Information needed.

Diﬃculties Students may be puzzled by the proof that the empty set is included in every
set, which is an example of vacuous implication. Students also circulate a myth among
themselves that the empty set is an element of every set.
Other diﬃculties some students have include the belief that the empty set may be
denoted by {∅} as well as by ∅, and not understanding that the empty set is something
rather than nothing, so that for example the set {∅, 3, 5} contains three elements, not two.
These two confusions are probably related to each other.
See myths and set.
Acknowledgments Atish Bagchi

150

contents

wordlist

encapsulation See reiﬁcation.

151

index

contents

wordlist

endowed See equipped.

152

index

contents

wordlist

enthymeme An enthymeme is an argument based partly on unexpressed beliefs.

index

Beginners at the art of writing proofs often produce enthymemes.
Example 1 In the process of showing that the intersection of two equivalence
relations E and E is also an equivalence relation, a student may write
“E ∩ E is transitive because E and E are both transitive.”
This is an enthymeme; it omits stating, much less proving, that the intersection of
transitive relations is transitive. The student may “know” that it is obvious that the
intersection of transitive relations is transitive, having never considered the similar
question of the union of transitive relations. It is very possible that the student possesses
(probably subconsciously) a malrule to the eﬀect that for any property P the union or
intersection of relations with property P also has property P . The instructor very possibly
suspects this. For some students, of course, the suspicion will be unjustiﬁed, but for which
ones? This sort of thing is a frequent source of tension between student and instructor.

Terminology “Enthymeme” is a classical rhetorical term [Lanham, 1991] .

153

contents

wordlist

entiﬁcation See reiﬁcation.

154

index

contents

wordlist

equation An equation has the form e1 = e2 , where e1 and e2 are terms. The usual

index

extensional meaning of such an equation is that e1 and e2 denote the same mathematical
object. The intensional semantics varies with the equation and the reader.
Example 1 The intensional meaning of the equation 2 × 3 = 6 for a grade school
student may be a multiplication fact. The intensional meaning of 6 = 2 × 3 is typically
information about a factorization. And 2 × 3 = 3 × 2 is may be perceived as an instance of
the commutative law.

Acknowledgments The example comes from [Schoenfeld, 1985] , page 66.

155

contents

wordlist

index

equipped Used to associate the structure attached to a set to make up a mathematical

structure. Also endowed.
Example 1 A semigroup is a set equipped with [endowed with] an associative binary
operation.
Citation (BriPre92.146), (Kra95.55).

Acknowledgments Atish Bagchi.

156

contents

wordlist

index

equivalence relation An equivalence relation E on a set S is a binary relation on S that
is reﬂexive, symmetric and transitive.

Diﬃculties Students at ﬁrst ﬁnd it diﬃcult to reify the equivalence classes of an
equivalence relation. It is a standard tool in higher mathematics to take the classes of an
equivalence relation and make them elements of a structure, points in a space, and so on.
This type of construction may very well be the pons asinorum of higher mathematics.
(But there is the diﬀerence between continuity and uniform continuity, and other
problems students have with order of quantiﬁers, as well.)
See also fundamentalist.

157

contents

wordlist

index

equivalent [1] (Equivalence of assertions) Two assertions are equivalent (sometimes

logically equivalent) if they necessarily have the same truth values.
Example 1 There are many ways to say that two assertions are equivalent. Some are
listed here, all for the same assertions.
a) A real number has a real square root if and only if it is nonnegative.
Citation (NeiAnn96.642), (Ros93.223).
b) If a real number has a real square root then it is nonnegative. Conversely, if it is
nonnegative, then it has a real square root.
Citation (Ros93.208).
c) A real number having a real square root is equivalent to its being nonnegative.
Other phrases are used in special cases: in other words, that is, or equivalently, and
the following are equivalent.
Remark 1 If P and Q are assertions, most authors write either P ⇔ Q or P ≡ Q to
say that the two statements are equivalent. But be warned: there is a Boolean operation,
often denoted by ↔, with truth table
A B
A↔B
T T
T
T
F
F
F
F
T
F
F
T
This is an operation, not a relation, and the diﬀerence between “↔” and “⇔” matters. In
particular, the assertion that three statements P , Q and R are (pairwise) equivalent is
sometimes expressed by using if and only if or iﬀ in the form “P iﬀ Q iﬀ R”. This could
be translated by “P ⇔ Q ⇔ R”. Now, the connective ↔ is associative, so that
((P ↔ Q) ↔ R) ⇔ (P ↔ (Q ↔ R))

but the assertion “(P ↔ Q) ↔ R” does not have the same meaning as “P iﬀ Q iﬀ R”
(consider the case where P and Q are false and R is true).
In texts on discrete mathematics, [Grimaldi, 1999] , [Rosen, 1991] , and [Ross and
Wright, 1992] all use ↔ for the connective and ⇔ for the relation. The text [Gries and
Schneider, 1993] uses ≡ for the connective (and avoids the relation altogether) and [Epp,
158

contents

wordlist

index

1995] uses ≡ for the relation. It appears to me that most books on logic avoid using the
relation.
Acknowledgments Susanna Epp, Owen Thomas.

159

contents

wordlist

index

equivalent [2] (By an equivalence relation) A phrase of the form “x is equivalent to y” is
also used to mean that x and y are related by an equivalence relation. If the equivalence
relation is not clear from context a phrase such as “by the equivalence relation E” or
“under E” may be added.
Citation (Exn96.35).

160

contents

wordlist

index

establish notation Mathematicians frequently say
“Let’s establish some notation.”
meaning they will introduce a methodical way of using certain symbols to refer to a
particular type of mathematical object. This is a type of deﬁnition on the ﬂy, so to speak.
See also ﬁx and let.
Citation (CulSha92.235).

161

contents

wordlist

index

evaluate To evaluate a function f at an argument x is to determine the value f (x). See
function. Citations needed.

162

contents

wordlist

every See universal quantiﬁer.

163

index

contents

wordlist

index

example An example of a kind of mathematical object is a mathematical object of that

kind. One also may talk about an example of a theorem; but this is often called an
illustration and is discussed under that heading.
This article will provide a rough taxonomy of types of examples. The types given
overlap, and whether an example is an instance of a particular type of example may
depend on the circumstances (for example, the background of the reader or the student in
a class).

(a) Easy example An easy example is one that can be immediately veriﬁed with the
information at hand or that is already familiar to the reader. Easy examples may be given
just before or after a deﬁnition.
Example 1 An introduction to group theory may give as examples the integers on
addition or the cyclic group of order 2, the last (I hope) presented as the group of
symmetries of an isosceles triangle as well as via modular arithmetic.
(b) Motivating example A motivating example is an example given before the deﬁnition
of the concept, with salient features point out. Such an example gives the student
something to keep in mind when reading the deﬁnition.
Example 2 A teacher could discuss the symmetries of the square and point out that
symmetries compose and are reversible, then deﬁne “group”.
Remark 1 I have occasionally known students who object strenuously to giving an
example of a concept before it is deﬁned, on the grounds that one can’t think about how
it ﬁts the deﬁnition when one doesn’t know the deﬁnition. Students who feel this way are
in my experience always A students.
(c) Delimiting example A delimiting example (called also a trivial example) is one with
the least possible number of elements or with degenerate structure.
Example 3 An example of a continuous function on R that is zero at every integer is
the constant zero function. Many students fail to come up with examples of this sort (
[Selden and Selden, 1998] ).

164

contents

wordlist

index

(d) Consciousness-raising example A consciousness-raising example of a kind of
mathematical object is an example that makes the student realize that there are more
possibilities for that kind of thing that he or she had thought of. In particular, a
consciousness-raising example may be a counterexample to an unconscious assumption on
the student’s part.
Example 4 The function
f (x) =

1
x sin x

x=0

0

x=0

is an example that helps the student realize that the “draw it without lifting the chalk”
criterion for continuity is inadequate.
Example 5 Example 1 of [Richter and Wardlaw, 1990] provides a diagonizable
integral matrix whose diagonal form over Z6 is not unique up to ordering. This shows that
the usual assumption in diagonalization theorems that one is working over a ﬁeld cannot
be relaxed with impunity.
(e) Inventory examples Many mathematicians will check a conjecture about a type of
mathematical object against a small number of examples they keep in mind when
considering such objects. This could be called a list of inventory examples. The
quaternion group of order 8 is usefully kept on a list of inventory examples for ﬁnite
groups, for example.
(f ) Pathological example A research mathematician will typically come up with a
deﬁnition of a new type of mathematical structure based on some examples she knows
about. Then further thought or conversation with colleagues will product examples of
structures that ﬁt the deﬁnition that she had not thought of and furthermore that she
doesn’t want to be the kind of thing she was thinking of. Often the deﬁnition is modiﬁed.
Sometimes, no suitable modiﬁcation seems practical and one must accept these new
examples as valid. In that case they are often referred to by rude names such as
pathological or monster. This was the attitude of many nineteenth-century
mathematicians toward the space-ﬁlling curves, for example.
165

contents

wordlist

index

References The discussion of examples herein is drawn from [Michener, 1978] and
[Bagchi and Wells, 1998b] .
Diﬃculties We construct our mental representations of the concept primarily through
examples. (Indeed, one of the most eﬀective ways to learn a new mathematical concept is
to generate examples. See [Dahlberg and Housman, 1997] .) Experienced mathematicians
know that this mental representation must always be adjusted to conform to the
deﬁnition, but students often let examples mislead them (see generalization).

166

contents

wordlist

index

existential bigamy A mistake beginning abstract mathematics students make that

occurs in connection with a property P of an mathematical object x that is deﬁned by
requiring the existence of an item y with a certain relationship to x. When students have
a proof that assumes that there are two items x and x with property P , they sometimes
assume that the same y serves for both of them.
Example 1 Let m and n be integers. By deﬁnition, m divides n if there is an
integer q such that n = qm. Suppose you are asked to prove that if m divides both n and
p, then m divides n + p. If you begin the proof by saying, “Let n = qm and p = qm . . . ”
then you are committing existential bigamy.

Terminology The name is my own. The fact that Muriel and Bertha are both married
(there is a person to whom Muriel is married and there is a person to whom Bertha is
married) doesn’t mean they are married to the same person. See behaviors.
References [Wells, 1995] .
Acknowledgments Laurent Siebenmann.

167

contents

wordlist

index

existential instantiation When ∃(x) is known to be true (see existential quantiﬁer), one
may choose a symbol c and assert P (c). The symbol c then denotes a variable
mathematical object that satisﬁes P . That this is a legitimate practice is a standard rule
of inference in mathematical logic.

168

contents

wordlist

index

existential quantiﬁer For a predicate P , an assertion of the form ∃x P (x) means that

there is at least one mathematical object c of the type of x for which the assertion P (c) is
true. If the assertion is true, there may be only one object c for which P (c) is true, there
may be many c for which P (c) is true, and in fact P (x) may be true for every x of the
appropriate type.
Example 1 Let n be of type integer and suppose P (n) is the predicate “n is divisible
by 6”. Then the assertion ∃n P (n) can be expressed in the mathematical register in these
ways:
a) There is an integer divisible by 6. Citation: (LewPap98.20), (Mea93.387).
b) There are integers divisible by 6.
Citations (HenLarMarWoo94.213), (Ros93.293).
c) Some integer is divisible by 6. Citation: (Kra95.40).
d) Some integers are divisible by 6.
Note that if P (n) is the assertion, “n is prime and less than 3”, then the assertion
∃n P (n) can be expressed in the same ways.
Remark 1 It follows from the discussion above that in mathematical English, the
assertion, “Some of the computers have sound cards”, allows as a possibility that only one
computer has a sound card, and it also allows as a possibility that all the computers have
sound cards. Neither of these interpretations reﬂect ordinary English usage.
In particular, in mathematical discourse, the assertion
“Some primes are less than 3.”
is true, even though there is exactly one prime less than 3. However, I do not have an
unequivocal citation for this.
It would be a mistake to regard such a statement as false since we often ﬁnd ourselves
making existential statements in cases where we do not know how many witnesses there
are. Citations needed.
In general, the passage from the quantifying English expressions to their
interpretations as quantiﬁers is fraught with diﬃculty. Some of the basic issues are
discussed in [Chierchia and McConnell-Ginet, 1990] , Chapter 3; see also [Kamp and
Reyle, 1993] , [Gil, 1992] and [Wood and Perrett, 1997] , page 12 (written for students).
169

contents

wordlist

index

See also universal quantiﬁer, order of quantiﬁers, and Example 2 under indeﬁnite
article.

170

contents

wordlist

expansive generalization See generalization.

171

index

contents

wordlist

index

explicit assertion An assertion not requiring pattern recognition.
Example 1 Some calculus students memorize rules in the form of explicit assertions:
“The derivative of the square of a function is 2 times the function times the
derivative of the function.”
A form of this rule that does require pattern recognition is:
“The derivative of (f (x))2 is 2f (x)f (x).”
Remark 1 Most deﬁnitions and theorems in mathematics do require pattern
recognition and many would be diﬃcult or impossible to formulate clearly without it.
Remark 2 The process of converting a deﬁnition requiring pattern recognition into
one that does not require it bears a striking resemblance to the way a compiler converts a
mathematical expression into computer code..
Terminology The terminology “explicit assertion” with this meaning is my own.

172

contents

wordlist

expression See symbolic expression.

173

index

contents

wordlist

extensional See semantics.

174

index

contents

wordlist

index

extrapolate To assume (often incorrectly) that an assertion involving a certain pattern in
a certain system holds for expressions of similar pattern in other systems.
Example 1 The derivative of xn is nxn−1 , so the derivative of ex is xex−1 . Of course,
the patterns here are only superﬁcially similar; but that sort of thing is precisely what
causes problems for beginning abstract mathematics students.
Example 2 The malrule invented by many ﬁrst year calculus students that
dv
transforms d(uv) to du dx may have been generated by extrapolation from the correct rule
dx
dx
du dv
d(u + v)
=
+
dx
dx dx
by changing addition to multiplication. The malrule
√
√
√
x+y = x+ y
might have been extrapolated from the distributive law
a(x + y) = ax + ay
Another example is given under inﬁnite.
References [Resnick, Cauzinille-Marmeche and Mathieu, 1987] .
Terminology “Extrapolation” is the name given for this phenomenon in the mathematical
education literature. It is a type of generalization, but the latter word is overworked and
not used in that meaning here.

175

contents

wordlist

index

factor If an expression e is the product of several expressions ei , in other words
e = Πn ei
i=1
then each ei is a factor of e. A divisor of an integer is also called a factor of the integer.
“Factor” is also used as a verb. To factor an expression is to represent it as the
product of several expressions; similarly, to factor an integer (more generally an element of
a structure with an associative binary operation) is to represent it as a product of
integers. The use of the word typically carries with it the understanding that the factors
of the product must be of a speciﬁc type, for example primes in the case of integers.
See also term.
Citations (Sog89.494), (Sur77.728), (Sny82.463).

176

contents

wordlist

index

fallacy A fallacy is an error in reasoning. Two fallacies with standard names that are
commonly committed by students are aﬃrming the consequent and denying the
hypothesis.

Terminology The meaning given here is that used in this Handbook. It is widely used
with a looser meaning and often connotes deliberate deception, which is not intended here.

177

contents

wordlist

index

false symmetry A student may fall into the trap of thinking that some valid method or

true statement can be rearranged in some sense and still be valid or true. The examples
below illustrate what I mean.
The fallacy of aﬃrming the consequent is a kind of false symmetry, and one might
argue that extrapolation is another kind. The examples below are intended to illustrate
other types of false symmetry. See also counterexample.
I have observed all these errors in my own classes.
Example 1 The product of any two rational numbers is a rational number, so if x is
rational and x = yz then y and z must be rational.
Example 2 If V is a vector space with subspace W , then any basis of W is included
in a basis of V . This means that any basis of V contains a basis of W as a subset.
Example 3 Any subgroup of an Abelian group is normal, so any Abelian subgroup
of a group must be normal.
Remark 1 It would be desirable to come up with a better description of this process
than “rearranged in some sense”! There may, of course, be more than one process involved.

178

contents

wordlist

index

family A family of sets sometimes means an indexed set of sets (so diﬀerently indexed

members may be the same) and sometimes merely a set of sets.
[Ross and Wright, 1992] , page 686 and [Fletcher and Patty, 1988] , pages 41–42 both
deﬁne a family to be a set; the latter book uses “indexed family” for a tuple or sequence of
sets.
Citations (New67.911), (Oxt77.155), (Rot97.1440).

179

contents

wordlist

index

ﬁeld A ﬁeld is both a type of object in physics and a type of object in abstract algebra.
The two meanings are unrelated.

180

contents

wordlist

index

ﬁnd Used in problems in much the same way as give.
Example 1 “Find a function of x whose value at 0 is positive” means “Give [an
example of] a function . . . ”
Also used in phrases such as “we ﬁnd” to mean that there is an instance of what is
described after the phrase.
Example 2 “Since limx→∞ f (x) = ∞, we may ﬁnd a number x such that
f (x) > 104 .”
Citations (BumKocWes93.796), (Bir93.279).

181

contents

wordlist

ﬁrst order logic See mathematical logic.

182

index

contents

wordlist

index

ﬁx A function f ﬁxes a point p if f (p) = p.
Remark 1 This is based on this metaphor: you ﬁx an object if you make it hold still
(she ﬁxed a poster to the wall). In my observation, Americans rarely use “ﬁx” this way;
the word nearly always means “repair”.
Remark 2 “Fix” is also used in sentences such as “In the following we ﬁx a point p
one unit from the origin”, which means that we will be talking about any point one unit
from the origin (a variable point!) and we have established the notation p to refer to that
point.
Citations (Axl95.140), (Mar92.741).
Acknowledgments Guo Qiang Zhang.

183

contents

wordlist

index

follow The statement that an assertion Q follows from an assertion P means that P

implies Q.
The word “follow” is also used to indicate that some statements after the current one
are to be grouped with the current one, or (as in “the following are equivalent) are to be
grouped with each other.
Example 1 “A set G with a binary operation is a group if it satisﬁes the following
axioms . . . ” This statement indicates that the axioms that follow are part of the
deﬁnition currently in progress.
Citations (Epp95.36), (BelBluLewRos66.48), (BruMarWei92.140), (FarJon89.272),
(Kar72.706).

184

contents

wordlist

index

following are equivalent The phrase “ the following are equivalent” (or “ TFAE”) is
used to assert the equivalence of the following assertions (usually more than two and
presented in a list).
Citation (MorShaVal93.751).

185

contents

wordlist

for all See universal quantiﬁer.

186

index

contents

wordlist

form See collective plural.

187

index

contents

wordlist

index

formal
(a) Carefully written mathematics Describes prose or speech that directly presents a
mathematical deﬁnition or argument, as in “formal proof”. This is the terminology used
by Steenrod in [Steenrod et al., 1975] . In this Handbook such formal assertions are said
to be in the mathematical register.
Citation (AkiDav85.243).
(b) Use in mathematical logic The phrase “formal proof” is also used to mean a proof in
the sense of mathematical logic; see proof.
References [Grassman and Tremblay, 1996] , pages 46–48 deﬁne formal proof as in logic.
(c) Opposite of colloquial The word “formal” also describes a style of writing which is
elevated, the opposite of colloquial. It is not used in that meaning in this book.

188

contents

wordlist

index

formal analogy A student may expect that a notation is to be used in a certain way by

analogy with other notation based on similarity of form, whereas the deﬁnition of the
notation requires a diﬀerent use.
Example 1 Given real numbers r and s with s nonzero, one can form the real
number r/s. Given vectors v and w, students have been known to write v/w by formal
analogy.
Example 2 In research articles in mathematics the assertion A ⊂ B usually means A
is included as a subset in B. It carries no implication that A is diﬀerent from B. However,
the diﬀerence between “m < n” and “m ≤ n” often causes students to expect that A ⊂ B
should mean A is a proper subset of B and that one should express the idea that A is
included in and possibly equal to B by writing A ⊆ B. The research mathematical usage
thus fails to be parallel to the usage for inequalities, which can cause cognitive dissonance.
This formal analogy has resulted in a change of usage discussed further under another
planet.
Remark 1 I would conjecture that in Example 2, the same process is at work that is
called leveling by linguists: that is the process that causes small children to say “goed”
instead of “went”.

References This discussion is drawn from [Bagchi and Wells, 1998a] .

189

contents

wordlist

index

formal language A set of symbolic expressions deﬁned by a mathematical deﬁnition.

The deﬁnition is usually given recursively.
Example 1 Pascal, like other modern programming languages, is a formal language.
The deﬁnition, using Backus-Naur notation (a notation that allows succinct recursive
deﬁnitions), may be found in [Jensen and Wirth, 1985] .
Example 2 The languages of mathematical logic are formal languages. Thus terms
and expressions are deﬁned recursively on pages 14 and 15 of [Ebbinghaus, Flum and
Thomas, 1984] .
Example 3 The traditional symbolic language of mathematics is not a formal
language; this is discussed under that entry.
See also context-dependent.

190

contents

wordlist

formal logic Mathematical logic.

191

index

contents

wordlist

index

formula A symbolic expression that is an assertion. See the discussion under semantic
contamination.

192

contents

wordlist

index

forward reference A forward reference occurs when a pronoun refers to something

named later in the text.
Example 1 This is a problem I gave on a test:
“Describe how to tell from its last digit in base 8 whether an integer is even.”
In this sentence “its” refers to “an integer”, which occurs later in the sentence.
Remark 1 That problem and other similar problems have repeatedly caused a few of
my students to ask what it meant. These included native English speakers. Of course, this
problem is not speciﬁc to mathematical discourse.

Terminology I took this terminology from computer science. Linguists refer to forward
reference as “cataphoric reference” [Halliday, 1994] (page 314) or “backward dependency”
[Chierchia, 1995] .

193

contents

wordlist

index

fraktur An alphabet formerly used for writing German that is sometimes used for

mathematical symbols. It appears to me that its use is dying out in mathematics. Many
of the forms are confusing and are mispronounced by younger mathematicians. In
particular, A may be mispronounced “U”.
Also called gothic.

A, a
B, b
C, c
D, d
E, e
F, f
G, g
H, h
I, i

A, a
B, b
C, c
D, d
E, e
F, f
G, g
H, h
I, i

J, j
K, k
L, l
M, m
N, n
O, o
P, p
Q, q
R, r

S, s
T, t
U, u
V, v
W, w
X, x
Y, y
Z, z

J, j
K, k
L, l
M, m
N, n
O, o
P, p
Q, q
R, r

194

S, s
T, t
U, u
V, v
W, w
X, x
Y, y
Z, z

contents

wordlist

index

free variable A variable in a symbolic assertion is free if it is possible to substitute the

identiﬁer of a speciﬁc mathematical object and get a meaningful statement. In particular,
if one substitutes identiﬁers of speciﬁc mathematical objects for every free variable in a
symbolic assertion one should get a statement that is deﬁnitely true or deﬁnitely false. In
that sense, an assertion with free variables in it is parametrized; choosing values for the
parameters gives a speciﬁc statement. Similarly, one may substitute an identiﬁer of a
speciﬁc mathematical object of the correct type for each free variable in a term; doing this
turns the parametrized term into an expression that denotes a speciﬁc mathematical
object.
In contrast, one cannot substitute for bound variables.
Example 1 The assertion
“x2 − 1 > 0”
is not deﬁnitely true or false. However, if you substitute 2 for x you get 3 > 0 which is
true, and if you substitute 0 you get a false statement.
Remark 1 Observes that if we change the assertion in Example 1 to “x2 + 1 > 0”,
the result is deﬁnitely true (assuming x of type real) before substitution is made.
Nevertheless, you can substitute a real number for x in the assertion and get a statement
that is deﬁnitely true or deﬁnitely false (namely deﬁnitely true), so x is free. See open
sentence.
Example 2 The term x2 + y 2 becomes an expression denoting 13 if 2 is substituted
for x and 3 is substituted for y.
Example 3 The term Σn k becomes an expression denoting 6 if 3 is substituted for
k=1
n. But when one substitutes a number for k, getting for example Σn 5, one gets
5=1
nonsense; k is not a free variable in the expression “Σn k”, it is a bound variable.
k=1
Remark 2 The preceding discussion gives a kind of behavioral deﬁnition of how free
variables are used in the mathematical register; this deﬁnition is in the spirit of a
dictionary deﬁnition. In texts on mathematical logic and on formal languages, freeness is
generally given a recursive mathematical deﬁnition based on the formal recursive
deﬁnition of the language. That sort of deﬁnition constitutes a abstraction of the concept
of free variable deﬁned here.
195

contents

wordlist

index

It is necessary to give such a mathematical deﬁnition of “free variable” if one is going
to prove theorems about them. However, students need to know the intuition or metaphor
underlying the concept if they are going to make ﬂuent use of it. Most modern logic books
do attempt to provide some such explanation.

196

contents

wordlist

index

function The concept of function in mathematics is as complex and important as any

mathematical idea, though perhaps such concepts as space have more subtleties. This long
article discusses the syntax we use in talking about functions, the many metaphors behind
the idea, and the diﬃculties connected with it.
(1) Objects associated with a function
When a function is discussed in the mathematical register, some or all of the following
data will be referred to.
a) An identiﬁer for the function.
b) The domain of the function (discussed under domain).
c) The codomain of the function (discussed under codomain).
d) An element of the domain at which the function is evaluated.
e) The value of the function at an element of the domain.
f) The rule of the function, which is an expression or algorithm that provides a means
of determining the value of the function.
There is no single item in the preceding list that a discussion of a function must refer
to. We list many of the possibilities for referring to these data and the common
restrictions on their use.
(2) The identiﬁer of a function

(a) Name Functions may have names, for example “sine” or the exponential function.
The name in English and the symbol for the function may be diﬀerent; e.g. “sine” and
“sin”, “exponential function” and “exp”. See also deﬁnition.
(b) Local identiﬁer A function may be given a local identiﬁer. This is by convention a
single letter, often drawn from the Roman letters f through h or one of many Greek
letters.
(c) Anonymous reference A function may be speciﬁed without an identiﬁer, using some
form of structural notation. One form is to use the deﬁning expression (discussed below).
Other types of structural notation include barred arrow notation and lambda notation,
discussed under those entries.
197

contents

wordlist

index

(d) Naming a function by its value at x It is common to refer to a function with
identiﬁer f (which may or may not be a name) as f (x) (of course some other variable may
be used instead of x). This is used with functions of more than one variable, too.
Example 1 “Let f (x) be a continuous function.”
Example 2 “The function sin x is bounded.”
Citations (GraKnuPat89.71), (Mor95.716).
The deﬁning expression as the name of a function It is very common to refer to a
function whose rule is given by an expression f (x) by simply mentioning the expression,
which is called its deﬁning expression. This is a special case of naming a function by its
value.
Example 3 “The derivative of x3 is always nonnegative.”
Remark 1 It is quite possible that this usage should be analyzed as simply referring
to the expression, rather than a function.
(e) Using the name to refer to all the values The name of function can be used to stand
for all values. Examples:
“f ≥ 0.”
“x2 is nonnegative.”
Compare collective plural.
Citation (Pow96.879)
(3) The input
The element of the domain at which the function is evaluated may be called the argument.
I have heard lecturers call it the input, but in print this usage seems to be limited to
inputs to operators (usually functions themselves) or to algorithms.
See also arity.
(4) The value
The object that is the result of evaluating a function at an element x of its domain is
called the value or output of the function at x. Citation: (Fis82.445), (Jac34.70).

198

contents

wordlist

index

If the function is denoted by f , then the value at x is denoted by f (x), or less
commonly using one of many other arrangements, including:
a) f x (Polish notation).
b) xf (reverse Polish notation).
c) (x)f (postﬁx notation). These are discussed in their own entries with examples.
d) fx (mostly for integer functions — see subscript). Citations needed.
e) f [x]. This notation is used by Mathematica R ; parentheses are reserved for grouping.
(But many mathematicians regard the parentheses in the expression f (x) as an
example of grouping, presumably because they use Polish notation.)
See parentheses for more about their usage with function values.
Citations (Niv56.41), (Oso94.760).
More elaborate possibilities exist for functions with more than one input. See inﬁx
notation, preﬁx notation, postﬁx notation, outﬁx notation.
Remark 2 The word “value” is also used to refer to the number denoted by a literal
expression. Citation: (Mol97.531), (Oxt77.155).
Remark 3 Adjectives applied to a function often refer to its outputs. Examples: The
phrase “real function” means that the outputs of the function are real (but many authors
would prefer “real-valued function”). “F is a positive function” means that F (x) > 0 for
every x in its domain.
Citations (BelBluLewRos66.186); (BelEvaHum79.121); (GraKnuPat89.71). However:
“rational function” doesn’t mean rational output! Citation: (Pow96.879).
(5) The rule for evaluation
The rule for evaluation of a function can be a symbolic expression or an algorithm,
expressed informally or in a formal language. When the rule is given by an expression
e(x), the deﬁnition of the function often includes the statement
y = e(x)
which is called the deﬁning equation of the function.

199

contents

wordlist

index

Example 4
“Consider the function given by y = x2 + 1.”
The deﬁning equation is “y = x2 + 1”.
Example 5
“Consider the function f (x) = x2 + 1.”
Note that this gives the deﬁnition equation as a parenthetic assertion.
Citation (Mol97.531)
Diﬃculties An expression involving disjunctions can confuse students, who don’t
recognize it as one expression deﬁning one function.
Example 6

“Let f (x) =

x+1

if x > 2

”
2x − 1 otherwise.
Because of the practice of using deﬁning equations, students often regard a function
as an equation [Thompson, 1994] , pp 24ﬀ. So do teachers [Norman, 1992] .
(6) Variations in terminology
It appears to me that many mathematicians avoid using the word “function” for functions
that do not act on numbers, perhaps for reasons of readability. Instead, they use words
such as functional, operator, or operation. I have heard secondhand stories of
mathematicians who objected to using the word “function” for a binary operation such as
addition on the integers, but I have never seen that attitude expressed in print.
In this text functions are not restricted to operating on numbers. See also mapping.
(7) How one thinks of functions
A mathematician’s mental representation of a function is generally quite rich and involves
many diﬀerent metaphors. Some of the more common ways are noted here. These points
of view have blurry edges!
(a) Expression to evaluate Function as expression to evaluate. This is the image behind
statements such as “the derivative of x3 is 3x2 ” mentioned above. Note Example 1 under
semantics.

200

contents

wordlist

index

(b) Graph Function as graph. This provides a picture of the function as a relation
between argument and value; of course it is a special kind of relation.
(c) Dependency relation Function as a dependency relation. This is the metaphor behind
such descriptions as “let x depend smoothly on t”. It is related to the graph point of view,
but may not carry an explicit picture; indeed, an explicit picture may be impossible.
(d) Transformer Function as transformer, or machine that takes an object and turns it
into another object. In this picture, the function F (x) = x3 transforms 2 into 8. This is
often explicitly expressed as a “ black box” interpretation, meaning that all that matters
is input and output and not how it is performed. This idea is revealed by such language as
“2 becomes 8 under f ”.
(e) Algorithm Function as algorithm or set of rules that tell you how to take an input and
convert it into an output. This is a metaphor related to those of function as expression
and as transformer, but the actual process is implicit in the expression view (in the
intensional semantics of the expression) and hidden in the transformer (black box) view.
(f ) Relocator Function as relocator. In this version, the function F (x) = x3 moves the
point at 2 over to the location labeled 8. This is the “alibi” interpretation of [Mac Lane
and Birkhoﬀ, 1993] (page 256). It is revealed by such language as “f takes 2 to 8”.
(g) Map Function as map. This is one of the most powerful metaphors in mathematics.
It takes the point of view that the function F (x) = x3 renames the point labeled 2 as 8. A
clearer picture of a function as a map is given by some function that maps the unit circle
onto, say, an ellipse in the plane. The ellipse is a map of the unit circle in the same way
that a map of Ohio has a point corresponding to each point in the actual state of Ohio
(and preserving shapes in some approximate way). This is something like the “alias”
interpretation of [Mac Lane and Birkhoﬀ, 1993] : The point on the map labeled
“Oberlin”, for example, has been renamed “Oberlin”.
References [Lakoﬀ and N´nez, 1997] , [Selden and Selden, 1992]
u˜

201

contents

wordlist

index

(8) Mathematical deﬁnitions of function
Texts in calculus and discrete mathematics often deﬁne the concept of function as a
mathematical object. There are two nonequivalent deﬁnitions in common use. One deﬁnes
a function to be a set of ordered pairs with the functional property (pairs with the same
ﬁrst coordinate have the same second coordinate). The other speciﬁes a domain and a
codomain as well as a set of ordered pairs with the functional property, and requires that
the domain be exactly the set of ﬁrst coordinates and the codomain include all the second
coordinates. In the latter case the set of ordered pairs is the graph of the function.
(9) Diﬃculties
Typically, the deﬁnition of “function” does not correspond very well with actual usage.
For example, one generally does not see the function expressed in terms of ordered pairs,
one more commonly uses the f (x) notation instead. To avoid this discrepancy, I suggested
in [Wells, 1995] the use of a speciﬁcation for functions instead of a deﬁnition. Another
discrepancy is noted under codomain.
These discrepancies probably cause some diﬃculty for students, but for the most part
students’ diﬃculties are related to their inability to reify the concept of function or to
their insistence on maintaining just one mental representation of a function (for example
as a set of ordered pairs, a graph, an expression or a deﬁning equation).
There is a large literature on the diﬃculties functions cause students, I am
particularly impressed with [Thompson, 1994] . Another important source is the book
[Harel and Dubinsky, 1992] and the references therein, especially [Dubinsky and Harel,
1992] , [Norman, 1992] , [Selden and Selden, 1992] , [Sfard, 1992] . See also [Vinner and
Dreyfus, 1989] , [Eisenberg, 1992] and [Carlson, 1998] . [Hersh, 1997a] discusses the
confusing nature of the word “function” itself.
Acknowledgments Michael Barr.

202

contents

wordlist

index

functional A function whose inputs are functions and whose outputs are not functions
(typically the outputs are elements of some ﬁeld). Citations needed.

203

contents

wordlist

fundamentalist A fundamentalist, or literalist, or reductionist believes that the

index

formalism used to give a mathematical deﬁnition or to axiomatize a set of mathematical
phenomena should be taken as the “real meaning” of the idea and in extreme cases even
as the primary way one should think about the concepts involved.
Example 1 In the study of the foundations of mathematics, one of the problems is
to show that mathematics is consistent. One standard way to do this is to deﬁne
everything in terms of sets (so that math is consistent if set theory is consistent). In
particular, a function is deﬁned as a set of ordered pairs, an ordered pair (a, b) is deﬁned
to be something like {a, {a, b}}, and the number 3 may be deﬁned as {{}, {{}}, {{}, {{}}}.
A fundamentalist will insist that this means that an ordered pair and the number 3 really
are the sets just described, thus turning a perfectly legitimate consistency proof into a
pointless statement about reality.
That sort of behavior is not damaging as long as one does not engage in it in front of
students (except in a foundations class). Is it a good idea to send students out in the
world who believe the statement “2 is even” is on a par with the statement “2 is an
element of 3 but not an element of 1”? What matters about natural numbers and about
ordered pairs is their speciﬁcation.
We now consider two diﬀerent deﬁnitions of the same type of object.
Example 2 A partition Π of a set S is a set of nonempty subsets of S which are
pairwise disjoint and whose union is all of S. Here the only data are S and the set Π of
subsets and the only requirements are those listed.
Example 3 An equivalence relation on a set S is a reﬂexive, symmetric, transitive
relation on S. Here the data are S and the relation and the properties are those named.
The deﬁnitions given in these examples provide exactly the same class of structures.
Example 2 takes the set of equivalence classes as given data and Example 3 uses the
relation as given data. Each aspect determines the other uniquely. Each deﬁnition is a
diﬀerent way of presenting the same type of structure.
Thus a partition is the same thing as an equivalence relation. G.-C. Rota [Rota,
1997] exhibits this point of view when he says (on page 1440) “The family of all
partitions of a set (also called equivalence relations) is a lattice when partitions are
204

contents

wordlist

index

ordered by reﬁnement”. Fundamentalists object to regarding an equivalence relation and
its associated partition as the “same structure”. They say things like “How can a set of
subsets be the same thing as a relation?” It seems to me that this fundamentalist attitude
is an obstruction to understanding the concept.
The mature mathematician thinks of a type of structure as a whole rather than
always coming back to one of the deﬁning aspects. Students don’t always get to that stage
quickly. The set of subsets and the relation are merely data used to describe the structure.
To understand the structure properly requires understanding the important objects and
concepts (such as a function being compatible with the partition) involved in these
structures and all the important things that are true of them, on an equal footing (as in
the concept of clone in universal algebra), and the ability to focus on one or another
aspect as needed.
Example 4 First order logic is a mathematical model of mathematical reasoning.
The fundamentalist attitude would say: Then the expression of our mathematical
reasoning should look like ﬁrst order logic. This is Vulcanism.
Example 5 Fundamentalists may also object to phrases such as “incomplete proof”
and “this function is not well-deﬁned”. See radial concept.
See also the discussions under mathematical deﬁnition, mathematical logic and
mathematical structure.
Remark 1 One could argue that “fundamentalist” should be restricted to being
literal-minded about foundational deﬁnitions, but not necessarily other deﬁnitions in
mathematics, and that “literalist” should be used for the more general meaning.
Acknowledgments Peter Freyd, Owen Thomas and also [Lewis and Papadimitriou, 1998] ,
page 9, where I got the word “fundamentalist”. Lewis and Papadimitriou did not use the
word in such an overtly negative way as I have.
u˜
References [Benaceraﬀ, 1965] , [Lakoﬀ and N´nez, 1997] , pages 369–374, and [Makkai,
1999] .

205

contents

wordlist

index

generalization
(1) Legitimate generalization
To generalize a mathematical concept C is to ﬁnd a concept C with the property that
instances of C are also instances of C .
(a) Expansive generalization One may generalize a concept by changing a datum of C to
a parameter. This is expansive generalization.
Example 1 Rn , for arbitrary positive integer n, is a generalization of R2 .
(b) Reconstructive generalization A generalization may require a substantial cognitive
reconstruction of the concept. This is reconstructive generalization.
Example 2 The relation of the concept of abstract vector space to Rn is an example
of a reconstructive generalization.
Remark 1 The relation between reconstructive generalization and abstraction
should be studied further.
The names “expansive” and “reconstructive” are due to [Tall, 1992a] .
(2) Generalization from examples
The idea of generalization just discussed is part of the legitimate methodology of
mathematics. There is another process often called generalization, namely generalization
from examples. This process is a special case of extrapolation and can lead to incorrect
results.
Example 3 All the limits of sequences a student knows may have the property that
the limit is not equal to any of the terms in the sequences, so the student generalizes this
behavior with some (erroneous!) assertion such as, “A sequence gets close to its limit but
never equals it”. See also extrapolate and myths.
References This example is from the discussion in [Tall, 1992b] , Sections 1.5 and 1.6. See
also [Pimm, 1983] .

206

contents

wordlist

index

Terminology It appears to me that the usual meaning of the word “generalization” in
colloquial English is generalization from examples. Indeed, in colloquial English the word
is often used in a derogatory way. The contrast between this usage and the way it is used
in mathematics may be a source of cognitive dissonance.

207

contents

wordlist

generally See in general.

208

index

contents

wordlist

index

give “Give” is used in many ways in the mathematical register, often with the same sense
it would be used in any academic text (“we give a proof . . . ”, “we give a construction . . .
”). One particular mathematical usage: to give a mathematical object means to describe
it suﬃciently that it is uniquely determined. Thus a phrase of the form “give an X such
that P ” means describe a object of type X that satisﬁes predicate P . The description
may be by providing a determinate identiﬁer or it may be a deﬁnition of the object in the
mathematical register.
Example 1 “Problem: Give a function of x that is positive at x = 0.” A correct
answer to this problem could be “the cosine function” (provide an identiﬁer), or “the
function f (x) = x2 + 1” (in the calculus book dialect of the mathematical register).
“Given” may be used to introduce an expression that deﬁnes an object.
Example 2 One could provide an answer for the problem in the preceding example
by saying:
“the function f : R → R given by f (x) = 2x + 1.”
The form given is also used like if.
Example 3 “Given sets S and T , the intersection S ∩ T is the set of all objects that
are elements of both S and T .”
See also ﬁnd.
Citations (Bur94.17), (Epp95.534), (GelOlm90.65), (JenMul00.634), (Len92.216),
(Str93.17).

209

contents

wordlist

global See local.

210

index

contents

wordlist

index

global identiﬁer A global identiﬁer in a mathematical text is an identiﬁer that has the
same meaning throughout the text. These may be classiﬁed into three types:

(a) Global to all of mathematics Some global identiﬁers are used by nearly all authors,
for example “=”, mostly without deﬁnition. Some global identiﬁers such as π and e are
sometimes overridden in a particular text. Even “=” is sometimes overridden; for
example, one may deﬁne the rationals as equivalence classes of ordered pairs of integers,
and say we write a/b for (a, b) and a/b = a /b if (a, b) is equivalent to (a , b ).
(b) Global to a ﬁeld Some are used by essentially all authors in a given ﬁeld and generally
are deﬁned only in the most elementary texts of that ﬁeld.
Example 1 The integral sign is global to any ﬁeld that uses the calculus. This seems
never to be overridden in the context of calculus, but it does have other meanings in
certain special ﬁelds (ends and coends in category theory, for example).
(c) Global to a text A global identiﬁer may be particular to a given book or article and
deﬁned at the beginning of that text.
An identiﬁer deﬁned only in a section or paragraph is a local identiﬁer.
Remark 1 The classiﬁcation just given is in fact an arbitrary division into three
parts of a continuum of possibilities.
Diﬃculties Global identiﬁers speciﬁc to a given text impose a burden on the memory that
makes the text more diﬃcult to read, especially for grasshoppers. It helps to provide a
glossary or list of symbols, and to use type labeling. Steenrod [1975] says global symbols
speciﬁc to a text should be limited to ﬁve.
Mnemonic global identiﬁers of course put less burden on the reader.
Acknowledgments Thanks to Michael Barr, who made valuable suggestions concerning an
earlier version of this article.

211

contents

wordlist

index

global parameters Many texts have global parameters, not always made explicit, that
determine which of the many sine functions (and other trigonometric functions) and log
functions they are using.

212

contents

wordlist

index

gothic The German fraktur alphabet is sometimes called gothic, as is an alphabet similar
to fraktur but easier to read that is used as newspaper titles. Certain sans-serif typefaces
are also called gothic.

213

contents

wordlist

index

graph The word “graph” has two unrelated meanings in undergraduate mathematics:

a) The set {(x, f (x) | x ∈ D} for a function f with domain D.
Citation (Bau78.644).
b) A structure consisting of nodes with directed or undirected edges that connect the
nodes (actual mathematical deﬁnitions in the literature vary a bit).
Citation (Wil89.704).
Moreover, in both cases the word “graph” may also be used for drawings of (often
only part of) the mathematical objects just described.
Citations (Dan78.539), (Cur90.524), (BakDewSzi74.835).

214

contents

wordlist

index

grasshopper A reader who starts reading a book or article at the point where it discusses
what he or she is interested in, then jumps back and forth through the text ﬁnding
information about the ideas she meets. Contrasted with someone who starts at the
beginning and reads straight through.

Terminology The terminology is due to Steenrod [1975] . Steenrod calls the reader who
starts at the beginning and reads straight through a normal reader, a name which this
particular grasshopper resents.

215

contents

wordlist

index

Greek alphabet Every letter of the Greek alphabet except omicron (O,o) is used in

mathematics. Knuth [1986] , page 434) said upsilon (Υ, υ) was not used, but it occurs in
[Nyikos, 1984] , page 663. (Thanks to Gary Tee for this reference.)
All the lowercase forms and all those uppercase forms that are not identical with the
Roman alphabet are used. Students and young mathematicians very commonly
mispronounce some of them. The letters are listed here with pronunciations and with
some comments on usage. Some information about the common uses of many of these
letters is given in [Schwartzman, 1994] .
Pronunciation key: ˘t, ate, b˘t, ¯ve, p˘ r¯ c˘t, g¯, f¯¯d, f˘˘t, b˘t, m¯te, a the
a ¯
e e
ıt, ıde, o
o oo oo
u
u ¸
neutral unaccented vowel as in ago (¸g¯) or focus (f¯k¸s). A prime after a syllable
a o
o a
indicates primary accent; double prime secondary accent, as in secretary (s˘ kr¸t˘ r˘
e a a ı)
(American pronunciation). (Br) indicates that the pronunciation is used chieﬂy outside
the USA.
A, α Alpha, al f¸. Citation: (Bil73.1107).
˘ a
B, β Beta, b¯ t¸ or b¯ t¸ (Br). Citation: (Bil73.1107).
a a
e a
Γ, γ Gamma, g˘ m¸. Citation: (EdeKos95.7), (Mor92.91).
a a
∆, δ Delta, d˘l t¸. Citation: (Bar96.626), (BieGro86.425).
e a
E, or ε Epsilon, ˘p s¸l¸n, ˘p s¸l˘n , or ˘ps¯ l¸n. Note that the symbol ∈ for
e aa e ao
e i a
elementhood is not an epsilon. Citation: (DarGof70.729), (Sur90.321).
Z, ζ Zeta, z¯ t¸ or z¯ t¸ (Br). Citation: (Sny82.463).
a a
e a
e a
H, η Eta, a t¸ or ¯ t¸ (Br). Citation: (FarJon89.272).
¯ a
Θ, θ or ϑ Theta, th¯ t¸ or th¯ t¸ (Br). Citation: (IpsMey95.905), (Har93a.639),
a a
e a
(Sur90.321).
I, ι Iota, ¯o t¸. Citation: (New67.911).
ı¯ a
K, κ Kappa, k˘p a. Citation: (Car82.316).
a ¸
a
Λ, λ Lambda, l˘m d¸. Citation: (Car82.316).
a
M, µ Mu, m¯. Citation: (KupPri84.86).
u
N, ν Nu, n¯¯ or n¯. Citation: (Gil60.622).
oo
u
Ξ, ξ Xi. I have heard ks¯, s¯ and z¯ Note that the pronunciation s¯ is also used for ψ
e ı
ı.
ı
(discussed further there). Citation: (DebHol91.795)
O, o Omicron, o m˘ on or o m˘ on .
˘ ıkr˘
¯ ıkr˘
216

contents

wordlist

index

Π, π Pi, p¯ To the consternation of some students beginning abstract mathematics,
ı.
π is very commonly used to mean all sorts of things besides the ratio of the circumference
of a circle to its diameter. Citation: (Har93a.639), (Lef77.643), (Oss79.18).
P, ρ Rho, r¯. Citation: (Ost71.624), (Sri81.640).
o
Σ, σ Sigma, s˘ m¸. Citation: (Wit90.144), (Cur93.790), (Mea93.387), (Tal86.257).
ıg a
T, τ Tau, pronounced to rhyme with cow or caw. Citation: (Sog89.494).
Υ, υ Upsilon. The ﬁrst syllable can be pronounced o¯p or up and the last like the
¯o
˘
last syllable of epsilon. Citation: (Ree86.509), (Zan72.102).
Φ, φ or ϕ Phi, f¯ or f¯. For comments on the symbol for the empty set, see empty
ı
e
set. Citation: (Lef77.643), (Oso94.760).
X, χ Chi, pronounced k¯ I have never heard anyone say k¯ while speaking English
ı.
e
(that would be the expected vowel sound in European languages). German speakers may
pronounce the ﬁrst consonant like the ch in “Bach”. Citation: (Sri81.640).
Ψ, ψ Psi, pronounced s¯ s¯, ps¯ or ps¯. I have heard two diﬀerent young
ı, e
ı
e
mathematicians give lectures containing both φ and ψ who pronounced one of them f¯ and
ı
the other f¯. I am sorry to say that I did not record which pronunciation was associated to
e
which letter. I have also been to lectures in which both letters were pronounced in exactly
the same way. Citation: (Ost71.624), (Sur90.321), (Tal86.257).
Ω, ω Omega, ¯m¯ g¸ or om¯ g¸. Citation: (App71.56), (Fin99.774), (Mcc89.1328) ,
o a a
¯ e a
(Tal86.257).
Remark 1 Most Greek letters are pronounced diﬀerently in modern Greek; β for
example is pronounced v¯ ta (last vowel as “a” in father).
e

217

contents

wordlist

grounding metaphor See metaphor.

218

index

contents

wordlist

index

grouping Various syntactical devices are used to indicate that several statements in the

mathematical register belong together as one logical unit (usually as a deﬁnition or
theorem). In the symbolic language this is accomplished by delimiters. In general
mathematical prose various devices are used. The statement may be delineated or labeled,
or phrases from the general academic register such as “the following” may be used.
Examples are given under delimiter and follow.

219

contents

wordlist

index

guessing If the deﬁnition of a mathematical object determines it uniquely, then guessing
at the answer to a problem and then using the deﬁnition or a theorem to prove it is
correct is legitimate, but many students don’t believe this.
Example 1 It is perfectly appropriate to guess at an antiderivative and then prove
that it is correct by diﬀerentiating it. Many students become uncomfortable if a professor
does that in class.
This attitude is a special case of algorithm addiction.

220

contents

wordlist

index

hanging theorem A theorem stated at the point where its proof is completed, in

contrast to the more usual practice of stating the theorem and then giving the proof.

References The name is due to Halmos [Steenrod et al., 1975] , page 34, who deprecates
the practice, as does [Krantz, 1997] , page 68.

221

contents

wordlist

hat See circumﬂex.

222

index

contents

hidden curriculum

wordlist
Covert curriculum.

223

index

contents

wordlist

index

hold An assertion P about mathematical objects of type X holds for an instance i of X
if P becomes true when P is instantiated at i.
Example 1 Let the type of x be real and let P be the predicate
f (x) > −1
Then P holds when f is instantiated as the sine function and x is instantiated as 0.
Typical usage in the mathematical register would be something like this: “P holds for
f = sin and x = 0.”
”Hold” is perhaps most often used when the instance i is bound by a quantiﬁer.
Example 2 “x2 + 1 is positive for all x.”
Citation (Bar96.631). (FarJon89.272).

224

contents

wordlist

index

hypothesis The hypothesis of a conditional assertion of the form P ⇒ Q is P . Also
called antecedent or assumption.

225

contents

wordlist

index

I The symbol I is often used to denote the unit interval, the set of real numbers x for
which 0 ≤ x ≤ 1. For some authors, I or I is deﬁned to be the set of integers.

226

contents

wordlist

index

identiﬁer An identiﬁer is a word, phrase or symbol used as the name of a mathematical

object. An identiﬁer may be a symbol or a name. Symbols and names are deﬁned in their
own entries; each of these words has precise meanings in this Handbook that do not
coincide with common use.
We discuss the distinction between name and symbol here. A name is an English
noun phrase. A symbol is a part of the symbolic language of mathematics.
Example 1 The expressions i, π and sin can be used in symbolic expressions and so
are symbols for certain objects. The phrase “the sine function” is a name. If a citation is
found for “sine” used in a symbolic expression, such as “sine(π)”, then for that author,
“sine” is a symbol.
Remark 1 The number π does not appear to have a nonsymbolic name in common
use; it is normally identiﬁed by its symbol in both English discourse and symbolic
expressions. The complex number i is also commonly referred to by its symbol, but it can
also be called the imaginary unit. Citation: (HarJor67.559), (Poo00.4).
Remark 2 I have not found examples of an identiﬁer that is not clearly either a
name or a symbol. The symbolic language and the English it is embedded in seem to be
quite sharply distinguished.

Terminology I have adopted the distinction between name and symbol from [Beccari,
1997] , who presumably is following the usage of [ISO, 1982] which at this writing I have
not seen yet.

227

contents

wordlist

index

identify To identify an object A with another object B is to regard them as identically

the same object. This may be done via some formalism such as an amalgamated product
or a pushout in the sense of category theory, but it may also be done in a way that
suppresses the formalism (as in Example 1 below).
Example 1 The M¨bius strip may be constructed by identifying the edge
o
{(0, y) | 0 ≤ y ≤ 1}
of the unit square with the edge
{(1, y) | 0 ≤ y ≤ 1}
in such a way that (0, y) is identiﬁed with (1, 1 − y).
Remark 1 One may talk about identifying one structure (space) with another, or
about identifying individual elements of one structure with another. The word is used
both ways as the citations illustrate. Example 1 uses the word both ways in the same
construction.
Remark 2 One often identiﬁes objects without any formal construction and even
without comment. That is an example of conceptual blending; examples are given there.
Citations (Maz93.29), (Mor92.91).

228

contents

wordlist

index

identity This word has three common meanings.
(a) Equation that always holds An identity is an equation that holds between two
expressions for any valid values of the variables in the expressions. Thus, for real numbers,
the equation (x + 1)2 = x2 + 2x + 1 is an identity.
(b) Identity element of an algebraic structure If x ∆ e = e ∆ x for all x in an algebraic
structure with binary operation ∆, then e is an identity or identity element for the
structure.
(c) Identity function For a given set S, the function from S to S that takes every element
of S to itself is called the identity function. This is an example of a polymorphic
deﬁnition.

229

contents

wordlist

index

if
(a) Introduces conditional assertion The many ways in which “if” is used in translating
conditional assertions are discussed under conditional assertion.
(b) In deﬁnitions It is a convention that the word if used to introduce the deﬁniens in a
deﬁnition means “if and only if”.
Example 1 “An integer is even if it is divisible by 2.”
Citation (GraTre96.105); (LewPap98.20), deﬁnition of “equinumerous”. Some
authors regularly use “if and only if” or “iﬀ”. Citation: (Epp95.534), (Sol95.144).
This is discussed (with varying recommendations) in [Gillman, 1987] , page 14;
[Higham, 1993] , page 16; [Krantz, 1997] , page 71; [Bagchi and Wells, 1998a] .
(c) In the precondition of a deﬁnition “If” can be used in the precondition of a deﬁnition
to introduce the structures necessary to make the deﬁnition, in much the same way as let.
See Example 5 under deﬁnition.
Citations (Ant84.90), (KolBusRos96.109).
See also the discussion under let.

230

contents

wordlist

index

if and only if This phrase denotes the relation equivalent that may hold between two
assertions.

231

contents

wordlist

iﬀ Abbreviation of if and only if.

Citation (DorHoh78.166), (Pin64.108).

232

index

contents

wordlist

index

illustration A drawing or computer rendering of a curve or surface may be referred to as

an illustration. Thus a drawing of (part of) the graph of the equation y = x2 would be
called an illustration.
The word is also used to refer to an instance of an object that satisﬁes the hypotheses
and conclusion of a theorem. (This is also called an example of the theorem.)
Example 1 A professor could illustrate the theorem that a function is increasing
where its derivative is positive by referring to a drawing of the graph of y = x2 .
Example 2 The fact that subgroups of an Abelian group are normal could be
illustrated by calculating the cosets of the two-element subgroup of Z6 . This calculation
might not involve a picture or drawing but it could still be called an illustration of the
theorem.
Citations (Bil73.1107), (BruMarWei92.140).

233

contents

wordlist

index

image Used to refer to the mental representation of a concept. This word also has a
polymorphic mathematical meaning discussed under overloaded notation.

234

contents

wordlist

implication See conditional assertion.

235

index

contents

wordlist

in general The phrase“in general” occurs in at least two ways in mathematical

index

statements. (One may often use “generally” with the same meaning.)
Example 1 “The equation x2 − 1 = (x − 1)(x + 1) is true in general.”
Example 2 “In general, not every subgroup of a group is normal.”
Example 1 asserts that the equation in question is always true. Example 2 does not
make the analogous claim. In searching for citations I have found many uses of the phrase
where it was quite diﬃcult to know which meaning the author intended: one must have a
good grasp of the subject matter to determine that. The examples suggest that syntax
may give a clue as to the author’s intentions. This phrase requires further investigation.
Citations needed.
This phrase should probably be deprecated.

Acknowledgments Owen Thomas.

236

contents

wordlist

index

in other words This phrase means that what follows is equivalent to what precedes.
Usually used when the equivalence is easy to see.
Citation (MacBir93.43).

237

contents

wordlist

index

in particular Used to specify that the following statement is an instantiation of the

preceding statement, or more generally a consequence of some of the preceding
statements. The following statement may indeed be equivalent to the preceding one,
although that ﬂies in the face of the usual meaning of “particular”.
Example 1 “We now know that f is diﬀerentiable. In particular, it is continuous.”
Citations (Duk97.193), (Kra95.40), (Mau78.575).
Remark 1 In the literature search I have found examples where what follows did not
seem to be a consequence of what preceded in any reasonable sense, for example in
(Zal80.162), but this may be the result of my ignorance.

238

contents

wordlist

index

in your own words Students are encouraged in high school to describe things “in your

own words”. When they do this in mathematics class, the resulting reworded deﬁnition or
theorem can be seriously misleading or wrong. It might be reasonable for a teacher to
encourage students to rewrite mathematical statements in their own words and then
submit them to the teacher, who would scrutinize them for dysfunctionality.
Example 1 Students frequently use the word “unique” inappropriately. A notorious
example concerns the deﬁnition of function and the deﬁnition of injective, both of which
students may reword using the same words:
“A function is a relation where is a unique output for every input.”
“An injective function is one where is a unique output for every input.”

239

contents

wordlist

index

include For sets A and B, B includes A, written A ⊆ B, if every element of A is an
element of B. See the discussions under contain and formal analogy.

240

contents

wordlist

index

indeﬁnite article The word “a” or “an” is the indeﬁnite article, one of two articles in
English.

(a) Generic use In mathematical writing, the indeﬁnite article may be used in the
subject of a clause with an identiﬁer of a type of mathematical object (producing an
indeﬁnite description) to indicate an arbitrary object of that type. Note that plural
indeﬁnite descriptions do not use an article. This usage occurs outside mathematics as
well and is given a theoretical treatment in [Kamp and Reyle, 1993] , section 3.7.4.
Example 1
“Show that an integer that is divisible by four is divisible by two.”
Correct interpretation: Show that every integer that is divisible by four is divisible by
two. Incorrect interpretation: Show that some integer that is divisible by four is divisible
by two. Thus in a sentence like this it the indeﬁnite article has the force of a universal
quantiﬁer. Unfortunately, this is also true of the deﬁnite article in some circumstances;
more examples are given in the article on universal quantiﬁer.
Citation (Gie71.37), (Ros93.208) (for the indeﬁnite article); (Ros93.223) (for the
deﬁnite article).
Remark 1 This usage is deprecated by Gillman [1987] , page 7. Hersh [1997a] makes
the point that if a student is asked the question above on an exam and answers, “24 is
divisible by 4, and it is divisible by 2”, the student should realize that with that
interpretation the problem is too trivial to be on the exam.
Remark 2 An indeﬁnite description apparently has the force of universal
quantiﬁcation only in the subject of the clause. Consider:
a) “A number divisible by 4 is even.” (Subject of sentence.)
b) “Show that a number divisible by 4 is even.” (Subject of subordinate clause.)
c) “Problem: Find a number divisible by 4.” (Object of verb.) This does not mean ﬁnd
every number divisible by 4; one will do.
Remark 3 In ordinary English sentences, such as
“A wolf takes a mate for life.”

241

contents

wordlist

index

( [Kamp and Reyle, 1993] , page 294), the meaning is that the assertion is true for a
typical individual (typical wolf in this case). In mathematics, however, the assertion is
required to be true without exception. See concept.
The universal force of an indeﬁnite description can be changed by context, so that one
cannot always tell merely from syntax whether the universal quantiﬁcation is intended.
(b) Existential meaning An indeﬁnite description may have existential force.
Example 2
“A prime larger than 100 was found in 2700 B.C. by Argh P. Ugh.”
This does not mean that Mr. Ugh found every prime larger than 100. In this case the
indeﬁnite description is the subject of a passive verb, but in ordinary English indeﬁnite
subjects of active verbs can have existential force, too, as in “A man came to the door last
night selling toothbrushes”. I have found it diﬃcult to come up with an analogous
example in the mathematical register. This needs further analysis.

242

contents

wordlist

index

indeﬁnite description An indeﬁnite description is a noun phrase that is marked with

the indeﬁnite article in the singular and no article in the plural. It typically refers to
something not known from prior discourse or the physical context.
Example 1 Consider this passage:
“There is a ﬁnite group with the property that for some proper divisor n of its
order a subgroup of order n does not exist. However, groups also exists that
have subgroups of every possible order.”
The phrases “a ﬁnite group”, “a subgroup”, and “subgroups” are all indeﬁnite
descriptions.
An indeﬁnite description may have a generic use, discussed under indeﬁnite article.
Remark 1 This description of indeﬁnite descriptions does not do justice to the
linguistic subtleties of the concept. See [Kamp and Reyle, 1993] , section 1.1.3. I would
appreciate knowing of a reference to a less technical exposition of the subject.
References needed.

243

contents

wordlist

index

inﬁnite The concept of inﬁnity causes trouble for students in various ways.
(a) Failure of intuition concerning size Students expect their intuition on size to work for
inﬁnite sets, but it fails badly. For example, a set and a proper subset can have the same
cardinality, and so can a set and its Cartesian product with itself. (As Atish Bagchi
pointed out to me, the intuition of experienced mathematicians on this subject failed
miserably in the nineteenth century!) This is discussed further under snow.
(b) Inﬁnite vs. unbounded Students may confuse “inﬁnite” with “unbounded”. Computer
science students learn about the set A∗ of strings of ﬁnite length of characters from an
alphabet A. There is an inﬁnite number of such strings, each one is of ﬁnite length, and
there is no limit on how long they can be (except to be ﬁnite). I have seen students
struggle with this idea many times.
(c) Treating “ ∞” as a number. Of course, mathematicians treat this symbol like a
number in some respects but not in others. Thus we sometimes say that 1/∞ = 0 and we
can get away with it. Students then assume we can treat it like a number in other ways
and write ∞/∞ = 1, which we cannot get away with. This is an example of extrapolation.
References The mathematical concepts of inﬁnity are discussed very perceptively in
[Lakoﬀ and N´nez, 2000] , Chapter 8.
u˜

244

contents

wordlist

index

inﬁx notation A function of two variables may be written with its name between the two

arguments. Thus one writes 3 + 5 rather than +(3, 5). Usually used with binary operations
that have their own nonalphabetical symbol. See preﬁx notation and postﬁx notation.

245

contents

wordlist

index

injective A function f is injective if f (x) = f (y) whenever x and y are in the domain of f
and x = y. Also called one-to-one.
Remark 1 When proving statements using this concept, the contrapositive form of
the deﬁnition is often more convenient.
Remark 2 Students often confuse this concept with the univalent property of
functions. See in your own words.
Remark 3 I recall that in the sixties there were older mathematicians who became
quite incensed if I said “injective” instead of “one-to-one”. At the time I connected this
attitude with an anti-Bourbaki stance.
The last one who had this attitude (that I can remember) died recently. That is how
language changes.

246

contents

wordlist

index

insight You have an insight into some mathematical phenomenon if you have a sudden

jump in your understanding of the phenomenon. This may be accompanied by
ejaculations such as “ aha!” or “ eureka!”. The jump may be in incremental (but not
gradual!) increase in understanding (worthy of “aha!”) or a complete leap from
incomprehension to clarity (“eureka!”).
Remark 1 In my experience, the clarity that you feel after a Eureka insight tends to
become a bit cloudy as you become aware of subtleties you didn’t originally notice.
Example 1 The geometric diagram below proves that
a2 − b2 = (a − b)(a + b)
at least for positive real numbers a and b with b < a.
.

.

.
a−b

.

.

.

.

.

.

a−b

b

b

This causes many who have not seen it before to have a feeling something like: “Aha!
Now I really understand it!” or at least, “Aha! Now I have a better grasp of why it is
true.” Even if you don’t feel that way about this proof, you may have experienced a
similar feeling about another theorem, perhaps one whose proof by symbol manipulation
was more obscure.
Compare this with the proof given under symbol manipulation. Another example of
the aha experience is given under conceptual. See also light bulb mistake. In many cases,
the gain in insight is irreversible, an instance of the ratchet eﬀect.

247

contents

wordlist

index

instantiate To instantiate a variable in an expression is to replace it with an identiﬁer of

a speciﬁc mathematical object of the appropriate type. If all the variables in an expression
are instantiated, the expression should denote a speciﬁc object.
Example 1 If you instantiate x at 5 in the expression 2x + 1 you get an expression
denoting 11.

248

contents

wordlist

index

integer A whole number, positive, negative or zero.
Remark 1 I have no citation in which “integer” means nonnegative integer or
positive integer. However, students quite commonly assume that the word means
nonnegative or positive integer.
Remark 2 Many computer languages are arranged so that an integer is not a real
number. This may be indicated by requiring that every number be explicitly declared as
one or the other, or by the convention that a number is real only if it is represented using
a decimal point. Students often assume that mathematicians follow that convention and
need to be explicitly told that they don’t.
Example 1 In Mathematica R , “32” is an integer and “32.0” is a real number.
See divide.

249

contents

wordlist

index

integral An integral of a function is an antiderivative of the function. The word is also
used to denote a solution of a more general diﬀerential equation and as an adjective to
require that the modiﬁed noun phrase denote an integer (8 is an integral power of 2). I
have known students to be confused by both these variants.

250

contents

wordlist

index

interpretation An interpretation of a text is the current assignment of a value (possibly

a variable object) to each identiﬁer used in the discourse. With a given semantics, the text
with that interpretation may result in statements about the values of the identiﬁers which
may be true or false or (if some identiﬁers are variables) indeterminate. See context and
standard interpretation.
In mathematical logic the language is a formal language and the values lie in some
mathematical structure deﬁned for the purpose.

251

contents

wordlist

intensional See semantics.

252

index

contents

wordlist

index

isomorphic Each type of mathematical structure has its own deﬁnition of “isomorphism”.
The categorists’ deﬁnition of isomorphism (a morphism that has an inverse) has all these
deﬁnitions as special cases.

Diﬃculties Students frequently don’t catch on to the fact that, if M and N are
isomorphic structures of some type, there can be many isomorphisms between M and N .
See copy and up to.

253

contents

wordlist

index

italics A style of printing that looks like this. Many texts put a deﬁniendum in italics. See
deﬁnition.

254

contents

wordlist

index

jump the fence If you are working with an expression whose variables are constrained to
certain values, and you instantiate the expression at a value that violates the constraint,
you jump the fence.
Example 1 A student, in dealing with a sum of Fibonacci numbers, might write
Σn f (k) = Σn f (k − 1) + Σn f (k − 2)
k=0
k=0
k=0
not noticing that the sums on the right involve f (−1) and f (−2), which may not have
been deﬁned when the deﬁnition of Fibonacci number was given.
Terminology The name “jump the fence” is my variation of the “fencepost error”
discussed in [Raymond, 1991] .

255

contents

wordlist

just One use of the word “just” in mathematical discourse is to indicate that what

index

precedes satisﬁes the statement that occurs after the word “just”.
Example 1 (Assuming r and s are known to be integers greater than 1).
“ . . . Then m = rs. But that is just the deﬁnition of “composite”.”
(Or “That just means that m is composite”.)
Remark 1 My own perception of this usage before I looked for citations is that the
word “just” meant that what followed was equivalent to what preceded, but in many
citations what follows is only a consequence of what precedes. Indeed, in some citations it
is completely redundant.
Citations (Shp95.1303),(Mor88.814),(Put73.82).

256

contents

wordlist

index

just in case This phrase means that what follows is logically equivalent to what precedes.
Example 1 “An integer is even just in case it is divisible by 2.”
Citation (Put73.82),

257

contents

wordlist

index

juxtaposition Two symbols are juxtaposed if they are written down one after the other.
This most commonly indicates the numerical product, but is also used to denote other
binary operations, in particular the concatenate of strings.
Citations (Cli59.106), (Fea82.161).

258

contents

wordlist

index

labeled style The labeled style of writing mathematics requires labeling essentially

everything that is written according to its intent: deﬁnition, theorem, proof, remark,
example, discussion, and so on. Opposed to narrative style. This Handbook is written in a
fairly strongly labeled style.

References The labeled style was named and discussed in [Bagchi and Wells, 1998b] .

259

contents

wordlist

index

lambda notation A notation for referring to a function. The function is denoted by

λx.e(x), where e is some expression that allows one to calculate the value at x. The x is
bound in the expression λx.e(x).
Example 1 “The function λx.x2 has exactly one critical point.” This notation is
used in mathematical logic, computer science, and linguistics, but not generally by
mathematicians.
Citation (Bez89.271).
Compare barred arrow notation.

260

contents

wordlist

index

larger A text that says one set is larger than another may be referring to ordering by

inclusion, or may be referring to cardinality.
Citation (Van92.35); note that the authors feel obligated to explain that they mean
cardinality, not inclusion.

261

contents

wordlist

index

lemma A theorem. One may typically expect that a lemma is not of interest for itself,
but is useful in proving other theorems. However, some lemmas (K¨nig’s Lemma,
o
Schanuel’s Lemma, Zorn’s Lemma) have become quite famous.

Acknowledgments Owen Thomas.

262

contents

wordlist

lemmata Lemmas. An obsolete plural.

263

index

contents

wordlist

index

let “Let” is used in several diﬀerent ways in the mathematical register. What follows is a
tentative classiﬁcation. As remarked below, some of the variations in usage (as in
Examples 1 and 2) make no diﬀerence to the logical argument that the usage expresses.
This may make the classiﬁcation seem excessively picky. I am not aware of research on
students’ misunderstandings in these situations.
Assume and Suppose In many cases, assume and suppose can be used instead of
“let”. There are subtle diﬀerences between the way they are used and the way “let” is
used that need further investigation. Note that one says “Let x be . . . ” but “Assume
[Suppose] x is . . . ” If can also be used in some of these situations. The grammar varies
here: “If x = 1” cannot be a complete sentence, but “Let x = 1” can be.

(a) Introducing a new interpretation The most common use of “let” is to introduce a new
symbol, or change the interpretation of one or more symbols or of names. This, of course,
is a species of deﬁnition.
Example 1 Consider the theorem
“An integer divisible by 4 is divisible by 2.”
A proof could begin this way:
“Let n be an integer divisible by 4.”
This introduces a new variable symbol n and constrains it to be divisible by 4.
Example 2 Suppose the theorem of the preceding example had been stated this way:
“Let n be an integer. If n is divisible by 4 then it is divisible by 2.”
Then the proof could begin
“Let n be divisible by 4.”
In this sentence, n is introduced in the theorem and is further constrained in the proof.
Remark 1 These two examples illustrate that whether a new symbol is introduced
or a previous symbol is given a new interpretation is a minor matter of wording; the
underlying logical structure of the argument is the same.
Remark 2 “Deﬁne” is sometimes used in this sense of “let”; see Example 3 under
mathematical deﬁnition. Of course, there is no logical distinction between this use of “let”
and a formal deﬁnition; the diﬀerence apparently concerns whether the newly introduced
264

contents

wordlist

index

expression is for temporary use or global and whether it is regarded as important or not.
Further investigation is needed to spell the distinction out.
There are several distinct possible purposes in introducing a new symbol. They are
distinguished here because it may prove useful to make these distinctions overt to students.
(b) To introduce a hypothesis
Example 3 “Let n be an integer divisible by 4. Then n is even.” If, assume and
suppose can be used here, with requisite changes in syntax: “is” instead of “be” for
assume and suppose, and the sentences must be combined into one sentence with “if”.
Citations (BhaSer97.502), (GibBra85.691), (Bru93.370).
(c) To consider successive cases
Example 4 “Let n > 0. . . . Now let n ≤ 0. . . . ” If, assume and suppose seem to be
more common that “let” in this use. See now.
Citation (Ant84.121), (Djo82.233), (Kra95.40).
(d) To introduce the precondition of a deﬁnition
Example 5 “Deﬁnition Let n be an integer. Then n is even if n is divisible by 2.” If,
assume and suppose can be used here.
Citation (Kra95.57).
(e) To introduce an arbitrary object To pick an unrestricted object from a collection with
the purpose of proving an assertion about all elements in the collection using universal
generalization. Example 1 above is an example of this use. Often used with arbitrary. If,
assume and suppose can be used here.
(f ) To name a witness To provide a local identiﬁer for an arbitrary object from a
collection of objects known to be nonempty. Equivalently, to choose a witness to an
existential assertion that is known to be true. If, assume and suppose can be used here.
Example 6 In proving a theorem about a diﬀerentiable function that is increasing on
some interval and decreasing on some interval, one might write:
“Let a and b be real numbers for which f (a) > 0 and f (b) < 0.”
These numbers exist by hypothesis.
265

contents

wordlist

index

Example 7 In the context that G is known to be a noncommutative group:
“Let x and y be elements of G for which xy = yx . . . ”
The following is a more explicit version of the same assertion:
“Let the noncommutative group G be given. Since G is noncommutative, the
collection {(x, y) ∈ G × G | xy = yx} is nonempty. Hence we may choose a
member (x, y) of this set . . . ”
A variation on this is parametrized choice: Given that (∀x)(∃y)Q(x, y) and given c,
let d be an object such that Q(c, d).
Example 8 Assuming c is a complex number:
“Let d be an nth root of c.”
(g) “Let” in deﬁnitions Let can be used in a deﬁnition proper.
Example 9 “Let an integer be even if it is divisible by 2.”
Remark 3 This usage strikes me as unidiomatic. It sounds like a translation of a
French (“Soit . . . ”) or German (“Sei . . . ”) subjunctive. If, assume and suppose cannot
be used here. Citations needed.
Remark 4 The way “let”, assume, suppose and if diﬀer in their usage needs much
more analysis.
References This article follows the discussion in [Bagchi and Wells, 1998a] .
Acknowledgments Atish Bagchi, Owen Thomas.

266

contents

wordlist

lg See logarithm.

267

index

contents

wordlist

index

light bulb mistake The light bulb mistake is the belief that mathematical discovery, by
researchers and students, should normally consist of a series of (in my words) major
insights. In fact, in much research, the insights are uncommon and often tiny, coming
after tiresome calculation and much frustration.
The name comes from [Rota, 1996] , pages 130 ﬀ. He refers speciﬁcally to insights
which come with a feeling of having experienced something beautiful.

268

contents

wordlist

linking metaphor See metaphor.

269

index

contents

wordlist

ln See logarithm.

270

index

contents

wordlist

index

local With respect to a structure M, an object is deﬁned locally if it is in some sense

deﬁned only on a substructure of M. It is deﬁned globally if it is deﬁned on all of M.
This usage is usually informal, but in some cases the word “local” or “global” has a formal
deﬁnition.
Example 1 The phrases local identiﬁer and global identiﬁer in this text (borrowed
from computer science) are examples of informal usage of the terms.
The words may be used in settings outside the mathematical register. For example,
one might complain that one understands a proof “locally but not globally”, meaning that
one can follow the individual steps but has no overall grasp of the proof.
Citations needed.

271

contents

wordlist

index

local identiﬁer A local identiﬁer in a segment of a mathematical text is an identiﬁer for

a particular mathematical object that has that meaning only in the current block of text.
The block of text for which that meaning is valid is called the scope of the identiﬁer.
The scope may be only for the paragraph or subsection in which it is deﬁned, with no
explicit speciﬁcation of the scope given. If the scope is at the chapter level or higher the
author may make it explicit.
Example 1
“Throughout this chapter f will be a continuous function.”
Citations needed.
See also global identiﬁer.

272

contents

wordlist

index

logarithm The expression “log x” has a suppressed parameter, namely the base being

used. My observation is that in pure mathematics the base is normally e, in texts by
scientists it may be 10, and in computer science it may be 2, and that in all these cases
the base may not be explicitly identiﬁed.
Students in particular need to know that this means there are three diﬀerent functions
in common use called “log”. See also global parameters and trigonometric functions.
Remark 1 In calculus texts, loge may be written “ ln”, and in computer science log2
may be written “ lg”.
Citation (Bar84.429), (GreHoo98.36), (LleTovTri88.913).

Acknowledgments Owen Thomas.

273

contents

wordlist

index

look ahead When performing a calculation to solve a problem, one may look ahead to
the form the solution must take to guide the manipulations one carries out.
Example 1 Given a right triangle with legs a and b and hypoteneuse c, one can
derive the Pythagorean Theorem a2 + b2 = c2 from the identity
sin2 θ + cos2 θ = 1
by rewriting it as

a2 b2
+ 2 =1
c2
c

and then multiplying by c2 . Olson [1998] discovered that when asked to reverse the
process to derive the trig identity from the Pythagorean Theorem, some students balked
at the ﬁrst step, which is to divide the equation a2 + b2 = c2 by c2 , because “there is no
reason to divide by c2 ”:
The students apparently could think of no method or algorithm which said to do this.
Of course there is a method — look ahead to see what form of the equation you need.
More about this example in section (a) under attitudes. This is related to walking
blindfolded.

274

contents

wordlist

lowercase See case.

275

index

contents

wordlist

index

Luddism Luddism is an unreasoning opposition to all technological innovation. Luddites

appear in mathematics, most noticeable lately concerning the use of calculators and
computers by students. There is also resistance to new terminology or notation (see
Remark 3 under injective).
Remark 1 There is a legitimate debate over such questions as: Should calculators be
withheld from students until they can do long division rapidly and accurately? Should
Mathematica be withheld from students until they can carry out formal integration
rapidly and accurately?
Not everyone opposed to calculators or computers is a Luddite. Unfortunately,
professors by their nature tend to be skilled in argumentation, so it may take long
anthropological observation to distinguish a Luddite from a rational opponent of a
particular piece of technology.
Remark 2 The two questions in the preceding remark do not have to be answered
the same way. Nor do they have to be answered the same way for math majors and for
other students.

276

contents

wordlist

macron See bar.

277

index

contents

wordlist

index

malrule A malrule is an incorrect rule for syntactic transformation of a mathematical
expression. Examples are given in the entry for extrapolate.
This name comes from the mathematics education literature.

278

contents

wordlist

matchﬁx notation Same as outﬁx notation.

279

index

contents

wordlist

index

map Also mapping. Some texts use it interchangeably with the word “function”. Others
distinguish between the two, for example requiring that a mapping be a continuous
function. See also section (g) under function.
Citation (RosWri92.19).

Acknowledgments Michael Barr.

280

contents

wordlist

index

mathematical discourse is the discourse used by mathematicians and students of

mathematics for communicating mathematical ideas in a broad sense, including not only
deﬁnitions and proofs but also approaches to problem solving, typical errors, and attitudes
and behaviors connected with doing mathematics.
This is my own deﬁnition; I have no citations for it.

281

contents

wordlist

index

mathematical education One purpose of this Handbook is to raise mathematicians’

awareness of what specialists in mathematical education have found out in recent years.
The following entries discuss that and have pointers to the literature.
function
generalization
if
malrule
mathematical object
mental representation
order of quantiﬁers
proof
reiﬁcation
representation
self-monitoring
symbolic expression
syntax
universal quantiﬁer

abstraction
and
APOS
behaviors
cognitive dissonance
compartmentalization
concept
conceptual blend
constructivism
covert curriculum
deﬁnition
equations
example
extrapolate

The Advanced Mathematical Thinking website at http://www.soton.ac.uk/˜amt
provides an introduction to research in mathematics education at the level of college and
university students with an extensive list of references. Other useful websites are
http://www.bham.ac.uk/ctimath/talum/newsletter and
http://forum.swarthmore.edu/library/ed topics.

282

contents

wordlist

index

mathematical logic Mathematical logic is any one of a number of mathematical

structures that models many of the assertions spoken and written in the mathematical
register; such a structure typically is provided with rules for proof and rules for giving
meaning to items in the structure (semantics). The phrases formal logic and symbolic
logic are also used; the latter appears to me to be obsolescent. Citations needed.

First Order Logic The most familiar form of mathematical logic is ﬁrst order logic, in
which, as in many other forms of logic, sentences are represented as strings of symbols.
For example,
“There is an m such that for all n, n < m”
could be represented as “∃m∀n (n < m)”.
First order logic is a useful codiﬁcation of many aspects of mathematical formalism,
but it is not the natural or inevitable result of any attempt of formalizing mathematics.
For example, Hintikka [1996] has developed a logic, somewhat stronger than ﬁrst order
logic (but without its nice completeness properties), in which the dependencies among
variables does not depend on the order of the quantiﬁers. The approach of category
theory to model theory, as expounded in [Makkai and Reyes, 1977] , [Makkai and Par´,
e
1990] , and [Ad´mek and Rosiˇky, 1994] , produces formal systems that are very diﬀerent
a
c
in character from standard ﬁrst order logic and that vary in strength (in both directions)
from ﬁrst order logic.
This situation is in contrast to the facts about the theory of computation, where
various attempts to give a mathematical deﬁnition of “computable function” have all
given the same class of functions.
Nevertheless, ﬁrst order logic has better formal properties than many other
codiﬁcations of mathematical reasoning, and many mathematicians operate in the belief
that the assertions and proofs they give in the mathematical register can in principle be
translated into ﬁrst order logic. This is desirable because a purported proof in the formal
symbolism of mathematical logic can be mechanically checked for correctness.
In practice no substantial proof gets so far as to be expressed in logical symbolism; in
fact to do so would probably be impossibly time-consuming and the resulting proof not
mechanically checkable because it would be too large. What does happen is that someone
283

contents

wordlist

index

will challenge a step in a proof and the author will defend it by expanding the step into a
proof containing more detail, and this process continues until everyone is satisﬁed. The
mathematicians mentioned in the preceding paragraph may believe that if this expansion
process is continued long enough the proof will become a proof in the sense of
mathematical logic, at least in the sense that every step is directly translatable into logical
formalism.
The best place to see the argument that every mathematical proof can in principle be
translated into ﬁrst order logic is the book [Ebbinghaus, Flum and Thomas, 1984] (read
the beginning of Chapter XI). In particular, proofs involving quantiﬁcation over sets can
be expressed in ﬁrst order logic by incorporating some set of axioms for set theory. Even if
this is so, caveats must be attached:
1. First order logic may be optimal for mathematical reasoning, but not for reasoning
in everyday life or in other sciences.
2. First order logic is clearly not the ideal language for communicating mathematical
arguments, which are most eﬃciently and most clearly communicated in the
mathematical register using a mixture of English and the symbolic language.
Aside from those caveats there is a more controversial point. Consider the proof
involving the monk given in Example 2 under conceptual blend. This proof can probably
be transformed into a proof in ﬁrst order logic (making use of continuous mappings and
the intermediate value theorem), but the resulting proof would not be the same proof in
some sense. In particular, it loses its physical immediacy. Many geometric proofs as well
have a (physical? visual?) immediacy that is lost when they are translated into ﬁrst order
logic.
One could defend the proposition that all proofs can be translated into ﬁrst order
logic by either denying that the monk proof (and a pictorial geometric proof) is a
mathematical proof, or by denying that the translation into ﬁrst order logic changes the
proof. The ﬁrst approach says Euclid was not doing mathematics. The second violates my
own understanding of how one does mathematics, because what is lost in the translation is
for me the heart of the proof. Speciﬁcally, the checking one could do on the ﬁrst order
logic form of the proof would not check the physical or geometric content.
284

contents

wordlist

index

I do not deny that the translation process correctly models one sort of proof as
another sort of proof, and that it is a Good Thing that this can be done, as it usually is
when one kind of mathematics is modeled in another. The point is that the two kinds of
proof are diﬀerent and both must be regarded as mathematics.
See order of quantiﬁers, translation problem, and Vulcanism.
References First order logic is presented in the textbooks [Mendelson, 1987] ,
[Ebbinghaus, Flum and Thomas, 1984] , [van Dalen, 1989] . The formalisms in these books
are diﬀerent but equivalent.
Acknowledgments Discussions with Colin McLarty.

285

contents

wordlist

index

mathematical mind People who have tried higher level mathematical courses and have

become discouraged often say, “I just don’t have a mathematical mind” or “I am bad at
math”. Some possible reasons for this attitude are discussed under ratchet eﬀect, trivial
and yes it’s weird. Reasons for people being discouraged about mathematics (or hating it)
are discussed in [Kenschaft, 1997] .

286

contents

wordlist

index

mathematical object Mathematical objects are what we refer to when we do

mathematics. Mathematicians talk about mathematical objects using most of the same
grammatical constructions in English that they use when talking about physical objects.
Mathematical objects are like physical objects in that our experience with them is
repeatable: If you ask many mathematicians about a property of some particular
mathematical object that is not too hard to verify, they will generally agree on what they
say about it, and when there is disagreement they commonly discover that someone made
a mistake or misunderstood the problem.
This is not the place to consider what a mathematical object “really is” or even to
give a proper deﬁnition of one. However, I will make some distinctions and give examples.

(a) Types of mathematical objects It is useful to distinguish between speciﬁc
mathematical objects and variable ones.
Example 1 The number 3 is a speciﬁc mathematical object. So is the sine function
(once you decide whether you are using radians or degrees).
Example 2 Consider the discourse:
“Let G be a group with identity element e and an element a for which a2 = e.
Then a = a−1 .”
The author or speaker may go on to give a proof, talking about G, e, and a with the same
syntax used to refer to physical objects and to speciﬁc mathematical objects such as 3 or
the sine function (see also Platonism). Because of the way the proof is written, the writer
will appear to have in mind not any speciﬁc group, and not all possible groups, but a
nonspeciﬁc or variable group. So the natural interpretation of G is as a variable or generic
mathematical object.
Remark 1 The statement above that 3 is a speciﬁc mathematical object would not
be accepted by everyone. As Michael Barr pointed out in a response to a previous version
of this article, there are various possible deﬁnitions of the natural numbers and each one
has its own element called 3. Nevertheless, it appears to me that mathematicians
normally speak and think of the number 3 as one speciﬁc mathematical object, and it is
customary usage that this Handbook is concerned with. See fundamentalist and unique.

287

contents

wordlist

index

(b) More about variable mathematical objects There are various approaches via
mathematical logic or category theory to giving a formal mathematical deﬁnition of
“variable object”. In classical logic an interpretation of discourse such as that in
Example 2 assigns a speciﬁc group to G, its identity element to e, an element of that
group to a, and so on. An assertion containing identiﬁers of variable mathematical objects
is said to be true if it is true in all interpretations. I will call this the logician’s semantics
of variables. It would be reasonable to identify the variable object with the symbol in the
formal language (such as G in the example above) corresponding to it. Another possibility
would be to identify the variable object with the set of all possible interpretations,
although to do that correctly would require dealing with the fact that that “set” might
actually be a proper class. I don’t know whether anyone has worked out this point of
view. References needed.
Categorists have another approach to the concept of variable mathematical object.
One deﬁnes a theory, which is a speciﬁc category (the theory for groups, for example).
The theory contains a speciﬁc object g. Every group is the value at g of a certain type of
functor based on that theory. It is natural to interpret the object g of the theory (or,
perhaps better, the entire theory) as the object denoted by the identiﬁer G in Example 2
above.
The fact that a variable real number (for example) is neither positive nor negative,
and that a variable group is neither Abelian nor non-Abelian, is a sign that in reasoning
about variable objects the logic you use must be restricted, in particular missing the law of
the excluded middle. That sort of thing is worked out explicitly for the categorical
approach in [Fourman, 1977] , [Makkai and Reyes, 1977] , [Fourman and Vickers, 1986] ,
[Lambek and Scott, 1986] .
The approaches suggested so far are general ways of understanding variable objects.
Certain speciﬁc constructions for particular types of variable objects have been known for
years, for example the construction of the variable x in the polynomial ring of a ﬁeld as an
inﬁnite sequence that is all 0’s except for a 1 in the second place.
See also determinate, variate and Platonism.

288

contents

wordlist

index

(c) The nature of mathematical objects Some of the diﬃculties students have when
reasoning about mathematical objects may have to do with the properties we regard them
as having. Speciﬁcally, as most mathematicians think of them, mathematical objects are
inert (don’t interact with other objects, even other mathematical objects) and eternal
(time passing does not aﬀect them in any way).
Remark 2 A dentist may tell you that he has a hole in his schedule at 3PM next
Monday, would you like to come then? That hole in his schedule is certainly not a
physical object. It is an abstract object. But it is not a mathematical object; it interacts
with physical objects (people!) and it changes over time.
(d) Diﬃculties A central diﬃculty for students beginning the study of mathematics is
being able to conceive of objects such as the sine function as an object, thus reaching the
third stage of the APOS theory. This is the problem of reiﬁcation. Students also confuse a
mathematical object with the symbols denoting it. [Pimm, 1987] discusses this in
children, pages 17ﬀ, and much of the mathematical education literature concerning
function mentions that problem, too, as well as the more severe problem of reiﬁcation. See
also Example 2 under deﬁnition.
The diﬃculties students have with conditional sentences may be related to the inert
and eternal nature of mathematical objects discussed above under (c); this is discussed
further under only if and contrapositive.
Acknowledgments I learned the idea that mathematical objects are inert and eternal from
[Azzouni, 1994] . The example of the hole in the schedule comes from [Hersh, 1997b] ,
page 73. Michael Barr made insightful comments.

289

contents

wordlist

index

mathematical register This is a special register of the English language used for

communicating mathematical deﬁnitions, theorems, proofs and examples. It includes a
special version of English as well as the symbolic language of mathematics, mixed together.
Distinctive features of the mathematical register of English include
a) Ordinary words used in a technical sense, such as “function”, “include”, “integral”,
and “group”.
b) Technical words special to the subject, such as “topology”, “polynomial”, and
“homeomorphism”.
c) Syntactic structures used to communicate the logic of an argument that are similar
to those in ordinary English but with diﬀerences in meaning. Examples: “all”, “if
. . . then”, “let”, “or”, “there is”, “the”, . . .

Any register belonging to a technical subject has items such as (a) and (b). Some
words like these are listed in this Handbook, including words that cause special problems
to students and words that are used with multiple meanings.
The syntactic structures mentioned in (c) are major stumbling block for students. It
appears to me that these structures make the mathematical register quite unusual even
among technical registers in general in how far its semantics deviates from the semantics
of ordinary English. (However, every tribe thinks it is “more diﬀerent” than any other
tribe . . . ) Some of these syntactic structures involve expressions that are used with
meanings that are subtly diﬀerent from their meanings in ordinary English or even in the
general scientiﬁc register. Some of these are discussed in detail in the following entries:
arbitrary
but
conditional assertion
contrapositive
deﬁnite article
disjunction
existential quantiﬁer

if
indeﬁnite article
just
larger
negation
only if
or

290

order of quantiﬁers
some
such that
universal generalization
universal quantiﬁer
vacuous implication

contents

wordlist

index

References There seem to be very few articles that speciﬁcally study the mathematical
register. Some aspects are described in [Epp, 1999a] , [Pimm, 1987] , [Schweiger, 1994a] ,
[Schweiger, 1994b] , [Schweiger, 1996] . Steenrod [1975] , page 1, distinguishes between the
mathematical register (which he calls the “formal structure”) and other registers.
N. J. de Bruijn [1994] introduces the concept of the mathematical vernacular. He
says it is “the very precise mixture of words and formulas used by mathematicians in their
better moments”. He excludes some things, for example proof by instruction ( [de Bruijn,
1994] , page 267), which I would include in the mathematical register. He makes a
proposal for turning a part of the mathematical vernacular into a formal system and in
the process provides a detailed study of part of (what I call the) mathematical register as
well as other types of mathematical writing.
Remark 1 Many mathematical texts include discussions of history, intuitive
descriptions of phenomena and applications, and so on, that are in a general scientiﬁc
register rather than the mathematical register. Some attempts to classify such other types
of mathematical writing may be found in [Bagchi and Wells, 1998b] , [de Bruijn, 1994] ,
and in Steenrod’s article in [Steenrod et al., 1975] .
References Much of the current discussion is drawn from [Bagchi and Wells, 1998b] .
Acknowledgments Cathy Kessel.

291

contents

wordlist

index

mathematical structure A mathematical structure is a set (or sometimes several sets)

with various associated mathematical objects such as subsets, sets of subsets, operations
of various arities, and relations, all of which must satisfy various requirements. The
associated mathematical objects are called the structure and the set is called the
underlying set. Two examples of deﬁnitions of mathematical structures may be found
under equivalence relation.
Example 1 A topological space is a set S together with a set T of subsets of S
satisfying certain requirements.
Remark 1 The deﬁnition above of mathematical structure is not a mathematical
deﬁnition. To give a proper mathematical deﬁnition of ”mathematical object” results in
an unintuitive and complicated construction and the only reason for giving the idea a
mathematical deﬁnition is for purposes of foundations. In this category theorist’s mind,
the concept of setwithstructure is anyway the wrong way to do foundations of mathematics.
For example, this approach doesn’t ﬁt the naive picture of a space to start with a set
of points. A space ought to be a chunk with parts, not a collection of points. The points
ought to be hard to see, not the ﬁrst thing you start with in the deﬁnition. This point of
view has been developed by category theorists such as William Lawvere. [Lawvere and
Schanuel, 1997] provides an easy introduction to the categorical approach.

Diﬃculties Presenting a complex mathematical idea as a mathematical structure involves
ﬁnding a minimal set of associated objects (the structure) and a minimal set of conditions
on those objects from which the theorems about the structure follow. The minimal set of
objects and conditions may not be the most important aspects of the structure for
applications or for one’s mental representation.
Example 2 A function is commonly deﬁned as a set of ordered pairs with a certain
property. A mathematician’s picture of a function has many facets: how it models some
covariation (for example, velocity), its limiting behavior, algorithms for calculating it, and
so on. The set of ordered pairs is not what ﬁrst comes to mind, except perhaps when one
is thinking of the function’s graph.
292

contents

wordlist

index

Remark 2 Another aspect of deﬁnitions of structure is that the same structure can
have two very diﬀerent looking deﬁnitions. An example is given under fundamentalist.

293

contents

wordlist

index

mean
(a) To form a deﬁnition “Mean” may be used in forming a deﬁnition. Citation:
(Adl77.619).
Example 1 “To say that an integer is even means that it is divisible by 2.”
(b) Implies To say that a statement P means a statement Q may mean that P implies Q.
Citation: (Kra95.40).
Example 2 “We have proved that 4 divides n. This means in particular that n is
even.”

294

contents

wordlist

member See element.

295

index

contents

wordlist

index

mental representation One’s mental representation (also “internal representation” of a

particular mathematical concept is the cognitive structure associated with the concept,
including associated metaphors, mental pictures, examples, properties and processes.
The mental representation is called the concept image by many writers in
mathematical education. The deﬁnition just given is in fact a modiﬁcation of the
deﬁnition of concept image given by Tall [1992b] , page 7. The way human concepts are
organized, as described by cognitive scientists such as George Lakoﬀ [Lakoﬀ, 1986] ,
includes much of the structure of the mental representation of the concept in my sense.
This is discussed further under concept, prototype and radial concept.
In written or spoken mathematical discourse, discussion of some aspect of the mental
representation of a concept is often signaled by such phrases as “intuitively” or “you can
think of . . . ”. Citations needed.

(a) Mental representations and deﬁnitions The contrast between a student’s mental
representation of a concept and its mathematical deﬁnition is a source of cognitive
dissonance; students may avoid the disparity by ignoring the deﬁnition. The disparity
comes about from inappropriate learning strategies such as generalization and
extrapolation.
Professional mathematicians who are learning a subject know they must adjust their
mental representation to the deﬁnition. In contrast, in doing research they often quite
correctly adjust the deﬁnition instead of their mental representation. That is a primary
theme of [Lakatos, 1976] .
References Many articles in the book [Tall, 1992a] discuss mental representation (under
various names often including the word “image”) in depth, particularly [Tall, 1992b] ,
[Dreyfus, 1992] and [Harel and Kaput, 1992] . See also [Dieudonn´, 1992] V.6, page 163,
e
[Kieran, 1990] , [Meel, 1998] (expecially pages 168–170), [Piere and Kieren, 1989] ,
[Presmeg, 1997a] , [Tall and Vinner, 1981] , [Wells, 1995] , [Wheatley, 1997] .
Mental imagery is discussed from a philosophical point of view, with many references
to the literature, by Dennett [1991] , Chapter 10. The book [Lakoﬀ, 1986] is concerned
with concepts in general, with more of a linguistic emphasis.
A sophisticated mental representation of an important concept will have various
296

contents

wordlist

index

formalisms and mental pictures that ﬁt together by conceptual blending or metaphor.
[Lakoﬀ and N´nez, 1997] regard metaphor as central to understanding what mathematics
u˜
is all about.
Remark 1 I have known logicians and computer scientists (but not many, and no
mathematicians) who deny having any nonsymbolic mental representations of
mathematical concepts. Some of them have claimed to be entirely syntax directed; all
they think of is symbols. Perhaps some of these colleagues do have mental representations
in the broad sense, but not pictorial or geometric ones. Possibly the phrase “mental
image” should be restricted to cases where there is geometric content.
See also aha, conceptual, mathematical object, Platonism and representation.

297

contents

wordlist

index

metaphor A metaphor is an implicit identiﬁcation of part of one situation with part of

another. Synecdoche is a form of metaphor. Metaphor, like analogy, is an aspect of
conceptual blending.
I am using “metaphor” here to describe a type of thought conﬁguration, a form of
conceptual blend. It is also of course used to refer to a ﬁgure of speech that communicates
such a thought conﬁguration. Other ﬁgures do this, too, for example similes. See
[Lanham, 1991] for ﬁgures of speech and [Lakoﬀ and N´nez, 2000] , Chapter 2, for an
u˜
introduction to metaphors in cognitive science.

(a) Names from metaphors Many names in the mathematics register arose as metaphors.
Example 1 The interior of a closed curve is called that because it is like the interior
in the everyday sense of a bucket or a house. The fact that the circle is two-dimensional
instead of three-dimensional illustrates my description of a metaphor as identifying part of
one situation with part of another. One aspect is emphasized; another aspect (where they
diﬀer) is ignored.
Example 2 Presumably the name “group” was grounded in the metaphor of a group
of things as a thing. This is not a suggestive metaphor; after all, most mathematical
structures involve a collection of things. The fact that groups have a name that means a
collection of things is merely an unfortunate historical accident. The name is essentially a
dead metaphor which does not normally surface to my consciousness when I think about
groups.
(b) Grounding and linking metaphors Lakoﬀ and N´nez [1997] , [1998] , [2000] divide
u˜
metaphors in mathematics into two fundamental types: grounding metaphors, based on
everyday experience, and linking metaphors that link one branch of mathematics to
another. The following examples are derived from their work.
Example 3 The name “set” is grounded in the metaphor of “set as container”.
Example 4 In college level mathematics we have another metaphor: set as object
which can be the subject of operations. This is a linking metaphor (set as element of an
algebra). This causes diﬃculties for students, particularly “set as element of a set”; see
reiﬁcation.
298

contents

wordlist

index

Example 5 The representation of a number as a location on a line, and more
generally tuples of numbers as locations in a space, links numbers to geometry.
Example 6 The insight in the previous example got turned around in the late
nineteenth century to create the metaphor of space as a set of points. Topology,
diﬀerential geometry, and other branches of mathematics were invented to turn this
metaphor into a mathematical deﬁnition, which both made the study of spaces more
rigorous and also created unexpected structures such as space ﬁlling curves. See [Lakoﬀ
and N´nez, 1997] , [Lakoﬀ and N´nez, 2000] for insightful discussion of these matters.
u˜
u˜
See also conceptual blend, snow and Remark 1 under mathematical structure.
(c) Diﬃculties Most important mathematical concepts are based on several metaphors;
for example see the discussion under function. The daily use of these metaphors by
mathematicians cause enormous trouble to students, because each metaphor provides a
way of thinking about an A as a kind of B in some respects. The student naturally thinks
about A as a kind of B in inappropriate respects as well.
Example 7 One metaphor for the real line is that it is a set of points (as in
Example 6.) It is natural to think of points as tiny little dots; that is the way we use the
word outside mathematics. This makes it natural to think that to the left and right of
each point there is another one, and to go on and wonder whether two such neighboring
points touch each other. It is valuable to think of the real line as a set of points, but the
properties of a “line of points” just described must be ignored when thinking of the real
line. In the real line there is no point next to a given one, and the question of two points
touching brings inappropriate physical considerations into an abstract structure.
This example comes from [Lakoﬀ and N´nez, 2000] .
u˜
Remark 1 The discussion in Example 7 is the tip of an iceberg. It may be that most
diﬃculties students have, especially with higher-level mathematics (past calculus) are
based on not knowing which aspects of a given metaphor are applicable in a given
situation, indeed, on not being consciously aware that one has to restrict the applicability
of the mental pictures that come with a metaphor.
Why not tell them? It would be appropriate for textbooks to devote considerable
space to how mathematicians think of each concept, complete with a discussion of which
299

contents

wordlist

index

aspects of a metaphor are apt and which are not.
References Besides the references cited above, see [English, 1997] , [Pimm, 1988] , [Sfard,
1994] , [Sfard, 1997] .

300

contents

wordlist

index

mnemonic A mnemonic identiﬁer is one that suggests what it is naming.
Example 1 Mathematical mnemonic identiﬁers usually consist of the initial letter of
the word the identiﬁer suggests, as f for a function, G for a group, and so on.
Example 2 Category theorists use “Ab” for the category of Abelian groups.
[Bagchi and Wells, 1998a] urge the use of mnemonic identiﬁers and that use is
exempliﬁed in their research articles [Bagchi and Wells, 1997a] and [Bagchi and Wells,
1997b] .
Acknowledgments Michael Barr.

301

contents

wordlist

model A model of a phenomenon is a mathematical object that represents the

index

phenomenon. In fact, the mathematical object is often called a representation of the
phenomenon (this is discussed further under representation).
Example 1 A moving physical object has a location at each instant; this is modeled
by a function. One then observes that there is a relation between the derivative of the
function and the average velocity of the physical object that allows one to deﬁne the
instantaneous velocity of the object.
Example 2 Mathematical logic is a mathematical model of some of the best-behaved
part of mathematical discourse. Thus one models the assertion
“For every x there is a y for which xy = 1”
by the formula ∀x∃y (xy = 1). See symbolic expression.
Remark 1 Mathematical logic itself uses a concept of model (which has a precise
mathematical deﬁnition) that is an abstraction of the notion of model discussed here.

302

contents

wordlist

index

multiple meanings Many names and symbols in the mathematical register have more

than one meaning.
Example 1 I recall as a graduate student being puzzled at the two meanings of
domain that I then knew, with the result that I spent a (mercifully short) time trying to
prove that the domain of a continuous function had to be an connected open set.
Following is a list of entries in this Handbook of words and symbols that have two or
more distinct meanings. I have generally restricted this to cases where students are likely
to meet both usages by the time they are ﬁrst year graduate students in mathematics.
algebra
argument
category
constructivism
contain
divide
domain
elementary
equivalent
family

map
model
or
order
parenthesis
permutation
power
prime
proposition
range

ﬁeld
formal
function
graph
identity
if
image
integral
larger
logarithm

303

result
revise
subscript
superscript
term
trigonometric
functions

contents

wordlist

index

must One frequently ﬁnds “must be” used in the mathematical register when “is” would

give the same meaning. I presume this is to emphasize that the fact being asserted can be
proved from facts known in the context.
Example 1 “If m is a positive integer and 2m − 1 is prime, then m must be prime.”
This example is from citation (Ros93.224).

304

contents

wordlist

index

myths Students in mathematics courses have many false beliefs about the subject which
are perpetuated explicitly from class to class in their discussions with each other in
attempting to explain a concept “in their own words”. Some of the myths, sadly, are
perpetuated by high school teachers. I list two here; it would be helpful to give them
names as discussed under behaviors. Another example is given under element.

(a) The empty set Students in my discrete math classes frequently believe that the empty
set is an element of every set. Readers of early versions of this book have told me that
many high school teachers and even some college-level mathematicians believe this myth.
Other problems with the empty set are discussed in the article about them.
(b) Limits Many students believe that a sequence with a limit “approaches the limit but
never gets there”. This is discussed under cognitive dissonance.
Remark 1 Dysfunctional behavior is included as a “myth” in this Handbook only if
it is the result of belief in statements made explicitly by the students. See attitudes.

305

contents

wordlist

N The symbol N usually denotes the set of natural numbers.
Citation (Epp95.76), (DavPri90.3).

306

index

contents

wordlist

index

name The name of a mathematical object is an English word or phrase used as an

identiﬁer of the object. It may be a determinate identiﬁer or variate. It should be
distinguished from a symbol used as an identiﬁer. The distinction between name and
symbol is discussed under identiﬁer.

Sources of names
Common words as names A suggestive name is a a common English word or phrase,
chosen to suggest its meaning. Thus it is a metaphor.
Example 1 “Slope” (of a curve), or “connected subspace” (of a topological space).
See the discussion of suggestive names in [Wells, 1995] and [Bagchi and Wells, 1998a] .
Remark 1 Example 2 under semantic contamination shows the dangerous side of a
name being suggestive.
Learn`d names A name may be a new word coined from (usually) Greek or Latin
e
roots. Such an identiﬁer is a learned name. (Pronounce “learned” with two syllables.)
Example 2 “Homomorphism”.
Personal names A concept may be named after a person.
o
Example 3 L’Hˆpital’s Rule, Hausdorﬀ space.
Diﬃculties The possible diﬃculties students may have with common words used as
identiﬁers is discussed under formal analogy and semantic contamination. See also
cognitive dissonance and multiple meanings.
References This discussion is drawn from [Bagchi and Wells, 1998a] . [Hersh, 1997a]
gives many examples of dissonance between the mathematical meaning and the ordinary
meaning of mathematical words.

307

contents

wordlist

index

namely Used to indicate that what follows is an explication (often a repetition of the

deﬁnition) of what precedes.
Example 1 “Let G be an Abelian group, namely a group whose multiplication is
commutative.”
Example 2 “We now consider a speciﬁc group, namely S3 ”.
The word is also used after an existence claim to list those things that are claimed to
exist. (Of course, this is a special case of explication.)
Example 3 “12 has two prime factors, namely 2 and 3.”
Citations (MacBer93.237), (MacBer93.241), (Nev94.875).

308

contents

wordlist

index

narrative style The narrative style of writing mathematics is a style involving infrequent
labeling; most commonly, the only things labeled are deﬁnitions, theorems, proofs, and
major subsections a few paragraphs to a few pages in length. The reader must deduce the
logical status of each sentence from connecting phrases and bridge sentences. This is the
way most formal mathematical prose is written.
Contrast labeled style.
This style is named and discussed in [Bagchi and Wells, 1998b] .

References [Bagchi and Wells, 1998b] .

309

contents

wordlist

index

natural number For some authors, a natural number is a positive integer. For others it
is a nonnegative integer, and for others it is any integer. It appears to me that the most
common meaning these days is that a natural number is a nonnegative integer.
Citation (Epp95.76), (DavPri90.3), (Hat87.162), (New81.39).
Remark 1 As the citations show, the disagreement concerning the meaning of this
phrase dates back to the nineteenth century.

310

contents

wordlist

index

necessary Q is necessary for P if P implies Q. Examples are given under conditional
assertion.

311

contents

wordlist

index

negation The negation of an assertion P is an assertion that denies P . In some
circumstances that is the eﬀect of the English word not.

(a) Negation of quantiﬁed statements If P (x) is a predicate possibly containing the
variable x, then the negation of the assertion ∀x P (x) is ∃x ¬P (x). Similarly, the negation
of the assertion ∃x P (x) is (∀x)¬P (x). Here, the symbol “¬” means “not”.
Remark 1 Both of these rules cause diﬃculty in translating to and from English. It
is my experience that many students need to be explicitly taught these rules and how to
express them in English.
Example 1 The negation of the assertion
“All multiples of 4 are even.”
is not
“All multiples of 4 are not even.”
but rather
“Multiples of 4 are not all even.”
or, equivalently,
“Not all multiples of 4 are even.”
Remark 2 This illustrates the fact that simply putting a “not” into a sentence may
very well give the wrong results.
Example 2 In colloquial English as spoken by many people (including students!),
the sentence
“All multiples of 3 are not odd.”
means that some multiples of 3 are not odd (a true statement). A similar remark holds
for “Every multiple of 3 is not odd.” I believe that most mathematicians would interpret
it as meaning that no multiple of 3 is odd (a false statement). See Vulcanism. Citations
needed.
Remark 3 This phenomenon quite possibly interferes with students’ understanding
of negating quantiﬁers, but I have no evidence of this.

312

contents

wordlist

index

never An assertion about a variable mathematical object of the form “A is never B”

means that for all A, A is not B. An assertion of that form when A is a function means
that no value of A is B.
Example 1 “A real number never has a negative square.”
Example 2
“The sine function is never greater than 1.”
Citation (Duk97.193), (Pom96.1478). Citations needed.
See also always and universal quantiﬁer.

313

contents

wordlist

not See negation.

314

index

contents

wordlist

index

notation Notation is a system of signs and symbols not belonging to a natural language

used as a representation of something. The symbolic language of mathematics is a system
of notation. See establish notation.

315

contents

wordlist

index

now
(a) Change of subject “Now” may indicate a change of subject. In this use, it may have
the eﬀect of canceling assumptions made in the preceding text in order to begin a new
argument. Citation: (Kra95.40).
Example 1 “We have now shown that if x ∈ A, then x ∈ B. Now suppose x ∈ B. . . .
”
(b) Bring up a fact that is needed “Now” may be used to point out a fact that is already
known or easily deduced and that will be used in the next step of the proof.
Example 2 In a situation where we already know that x = 7, one could say:
√
“ . . . We get that x2 + y 2 = 100. Now, x is 7, so y = 51.”
This is similar to meaning (b) of but.
Citations needed.
(c) Superﬂuous word “Now” is commonly a ﬁller word, often omissible without any eﬀect.
Citation: (Ade97.806).
Remark 1 Usages (a) and (c) are not always easy to distinguish.
Acknowledgments Atish Bagchi

316

contents

wordlist

index

number theory In spite of what the phrase suggests, number theory is the study of the
integers, particularly with respect to properties of prime numbers.

317

contents

wordlist

object See mathematical object.

318

index

contents

wordlist

obtain Most commonly, “obtain” means “get”, as in ordinary English.

index

√
Example 1 “Set x = 7 in x2 + y 2 = 100 and we obtain y = 51.”
In the mathematical register, “obtain” may also be used in much the same way as
hold. This usage appears uncommon.
Example 2
“Let G be a group in which g 2 = e obtains for every element g.”
Citations (Bau78.644), (FurMar91.842), (GelOlm90.85), (Zab95.486).

Acknowledgments Atish Bagchi

319

contents

wordlist

index

ratchet eﬀect Once you acquire an insight, you may not be able to understand how

someone else can’t understand it. It becomes obvious, or trivial to prove. That is the
ratchet eﬀect.
This process probably involves synthesizing a new concept, as discussed by Dreyfus
[1992] , section 3.2. See also [Thurston, 1990] .
Remark 1 It is distressingly common that a mathematician for whom a concept has
become obvious because of the ratchet eﬀect will then tell students that the concept is
obvious or trivial. This is the phenonemon discussed in Remark 1 under trivial. It is a
major point made in [Kenschaft, 1997] , page 30.

320

contents

wordlist

one to one Injective.

321

index

contents

wordlist

index

only if In the mathematical register, if P and Q are assertions, “P only if Q” means P

implies Q. The phrase “only if” is not often used this way in ordinary English discourse.
Example 1 The sentence
“4 divides n only if 2 divides n”
means the same thing as the sentence
“If 4 divides n, then 2 divides n.”
Example 2 The sentence
“I will carry my umbrella only if it rains.”
does not mean the same thing as
“If I carry my umbrella, it will rain.”

Diﬃculties Students often get sentence in Example (1) backward, taking it to mean
(2 divides n) ⇒ (4 divides n)
Some of them ﬂatly refuse to believe me when I tell them the correct interpretation. This
is a classic example of semantic contaimination, a form of cognitive dissonance – two
sources of information appear to contradict each other, in this case the professor and a
lifetime of intimate experience with the English language, with the consequence that one
of them is rejected or suppressed. It is hardly suprising that many students prefer to
suppress the professor’s unnatural and unmotivated claims.
McCawley [1993] also rejects the equivalence of “A only if B” with “If A, then B”,
for ordinary discourse, but in the mathematical register the sentence must be taken to be
equivalent to the others. This diﬀerence may have come about because conditional
assertions in ordinary English carry connotations of causality and time dependence.
Because mathematical objects are thought of as inert and eternal, the considerations that
distinguish the two sentences in the example do not apply to statements such as the
sentence in Example (1); the truth of the statement is determined entirely by the truth
table for implication.
The remarks in the preceding paragraph may explain some of the diﬃculties students
have with the contrapositive, as well.
322

contents

wordlist

onto Surjective.

323

index

contents

wordlist

index

open sentence An open sentence is an assertion containing free variables. In many

circumstances such an assertion is taken as being true for all instantiates of its variables.
Citation (GraTre96.105). See universal quantiﬁer for examples.

324

contents

wordlist

index

operation Used to refer to a function of two variables that is written in inﬁx notation.
May be called a binary operation.
Example 1 The operation of addition on the set of real numbers is a binary
operation.
Citation (Fra82.11); (MacBir93.43). Some authors use “operation” in certain
contexts to refer to any function. Citation: (Sto95.619).

325

contents

wordlist

index

operator Operator means function. Most authors seem to use “operator” only in certain
restricted situations. It is often used when the domain is a set of functions or when the
operator is a function from a space to itself.
Citation (Buc97.60). (But a “linear operator” can be between diﬀerent spaces.)
The text [Grassman and Tremblay, 1996] uses “operator” to refer to a binary
operation used in inﬁx notation (see the discussion on pages 104 through 108). The text
[Gries and Schneider, 1993] takes a similar approach (page 7 and page 387). The word is
used to refer both to the symbol and to the function. This usage may be associated with
authors having a background in computer science.

Acknowledgments Atish Bagchi and Michael Barr.

326

contents

wordlist

index

or Or placed between two assertions produces the disjunction of the assertions.
Example 1

“x is nonnegative or x < 0”.

Diﬃculties As the truth table for disjunction indicates, “P or Q” allows both P and Q to
be true, although they cannot both be true in the example just given. The assertion
“ x > 0 or x < 2 ”
is true for any real number x. A student may feel discomfort at this assertion, perhaps
because in many assertions involving “or” both cases cannot happen. Authors often
emphasize the inclusiveness by saying something such as “or both”.
See [Hersh, 1997a] for more examples.
Citation (Ant84.91), (BumKocWes93b.499), (Mol97.531).
Students also have trouble negating conjunctions and disjunctions. A statement such
as
“x is not (P or Q)”
means
“x is not P and x is not Q.”
So does
“x is neither P nor Q.”
See also both and Example 3 under yes it’s weird.

327

contents

wordlist

index

or equivalently This phrase means that what follows is equivalent to what precedes. It is
usually used when the equivalence is easy to see. This usage has no relation to the
connective “or”.
Citation (BhaSer97.503).

328

contents

wordlist

index

order
(a) Ordering “Order” may be a variant of “ordering”.
Example 1 “Let ≤ be the usual order on the real numbers.”
Citation (DavPri90.3).
(b) Cardinality The order of a structure such as a group is the cardinality of (the
underlying set of) the structure.
Citations (Sen90.330). But the meaning can be more devious than that: See
(Lam91.305).
(c) Parameter The word “order” may refer to a nonnegative integer parameter of the
structure. Of course, the cardinality meaning just mentioned is a special case of this.
Example 2 The order of a diﬀerential equation is the highest derivative occurring in
the equation.
Remark 1 The word degree is also used in this way, but the uses are not
interchangeable. Indeed, a structure may have both an order and a degree, for example a
permutation group.
Citations (HawKis95.333), (Ros95.504).

329

contents

wordlist

index

order of quantiﬁers The distinction between continuity and uniform continuity shows
that the order in which quantiﬁers are applied can make a crucial diﬀerence in the
meaning of a deﬁnition.
Example 1 The statement
∀x∃y(xy = e)

about elements x and y of a group with identity e, says that every element has a right
inverse and is satisﬁed by all groups. In contrast, the statement
∃x∀y(xy = e)
is not satisﬁed by all groups. The idea is that the element y in the ﬁrst sentence depends
on the element x, and that according to the customary interpretation of sentences in
mathematical logic, this is signaled by the fact that the x comes ﬁrst. (See Vulcanize for
more about this example.)
Example 2 The deﬁnition of continuity is commonly begun this way:
“For every > 0, there is a δ > 0 for which. . . ”
Here δ depends on , but in contrast to the preceding example, the dependence is not
functional. This is discussed in [Bagchi and Wells, 1998a] .
Remark 1 In ordinary English the way quantiﬁers are ordered does not always obey
these rules. A student might say, “there is an inverse for every element” and be
understood in much the same way as one would understand a statement such as “there is
an ice cream cone for every child”. The latter statement, translated mindlessly into ﬁrst
order logic, brings up the picture of n children licking one cone. But no one in everyday
discourse would understand it that way, and only a few Vulcanists would think it bad
English. Nevertheless, in writing mathematical arguments in English, such constructions
should be avoided (see Vulcanize).
It appears to me that the meaning of sentences such as “There is an ice cream cone for
every child” is extracted using a mechanism similar to that for a distributive plural, but I
have not found anything in the linguistics literature about this. Information needed.
See also all, and and mathematical logic.

330

contents

wordlist

References [Dubinsky, 1997] .

331

index

contents

wordlist

index

orthogonal A system of notation is orthogonal if any construction possible in the

notation can be used anywhere it is appropriate.
Example 1 The notation for derivatives is not orthogonal. The prime notation can
be used for functions of one variable but not for functions of more than one variable.
Example 2 The notation involving d is used for functions of one variable; for more
than one variable one must change it to ∂.
Remark 1 These two examples are of diﬀerent sorts. The prime notation cannot be
used for more than one variable because it would become ambiguous. The diﬀerence
between d and ∂, on the other hand, is a matter of convention.
Example 3 Early forms of Fortran were not orthogonal; one could use an arithmetic
expression (for example, i + 2j 2 ) that evaluated to an integer in most places where one
could use an integer — but not in the subscript of an array. In other words, one could
write the equivalent of Ai but not of Ai+2j 2 . This context is where I ﬁrst met the word
“orthogonal” used.

Terminology I borrowed this terminology from the usage in computer language design.
Some computer scientists have told me they never heard the word used in this way, but I
heard it used in a talk recently. Citations needed.

332

contents

wordlist

index

osmosis theory The osmosis theory of teaching is this attitude: We should not have to

teach students to understand the way mathematics is written, or the ﬁner points of logic
(for example how quantiﬁers are negated). They should be able to ﬁgure these things on
their own — “learn it by osmosis”. If they cannot do that they are not qualiﬁed to major
in mathematics.
Citation I have seen this attitude expressed in a letter to the editor in the Notices,
but have lost the reference. References needed.
Remark 1 We learned our native language(s) as children by osmosis. That does not
imply that college students should learn mathematical reasoning that way. It does not
even mean that college students should learn a foreign language that way.

333

contents

wordlist

outﬁx notation A function is displayed in outﬁx notation if its symbol consists of

index

characters or expressions put on both sides of the argument.
Example 1 The most familiar example is indeﬁnite integral notation: The indeﬁnite
integral of a function f is denoted by f (x) dx. The deﬁnite integral is more complicated,
since it has three arguments (two numbers and a function) placed in three diﬀerent
locations.
Example 2 The absolute value of a number r is denoted |r|.
Example 3 The greatest integer in x is sometimes denoted by x .
Other examples are described under brace, angle bracket and bracket.
Also called matchﬁx notation. The latter name is used in Macsyma.
Citations (Ant84.121).

334

contents

wordlist

index

overloaded notation This phrase usually applies to a symbol or a name for a function

that takes on diﬀerent meanings depending on which type of element it is evaluated at.
Such a function is also called polymorphic.
Example 1 The identity function is a polymorphic name; in the usual formalism
there is a diﬀerent identity function on each set.
Example 2 A familiar example is the symbol ×, which is overloaded in college
mathematics courses. When a and b are numbers, a × b is their product. When A and B
are matrices, A × B is the matrix product. When v and w are 3-vectors, v × w is their
vector product.
Example 3 Another example is the common treatment of the image for arbitrary
functions: Let F : S → T be a function.
a) If x ∈ S, F (x) is the value of F applied to x. It is called the image of x under F .
b) If A is a subset of S, then F (A) = {F (x) | x ∈ A} (see setbuilder notation). It is
called the image of A under F .
c) The image of F is the set of all t in T for which there is an x ∈ S such that
F (x) = t, which is the image in the sense of (b) of the domain of F . The word
“range” is also used for this meaning.
Remark 1 The preceding example is in a way fake. One could simply stipulate that
every function F : S → T has values deﬁned for every element of S and (in the way
illustrated above) for every subset of S. However, the phrase “the image of F ” would still
overload the word “image”.
Example 4 A functor F from a category C to a category D is deﬁned on both
objects and arrows of C. This, too is a fake example, since the value of the functor at
identity arrows determines its value on objects.
Example 5 A text on vector spaces will very likely use + for addition of vectors in
every vector space. Similarly, some texts on group theory will use e or 1 for the identity
element for any group and juxtaposition for the binary operation of any group.
Remark 2 Example 5 illustrates the common case of using the same symbol in every
model for a particular operation in an axiomatically deﬁned mathematical structure.

335

contents

wordlist

index

Remark 3 The operation × does not require the same algorithm on matrices as it
does on 3-vectors. This is the sort of phenomenon computer scientists call ad-hoc
polymorphism. It is contrasted with parametric polymorphism, an example of which is
the algorithm “swap the two entries in an ordered pair”, which applies to ordered pairs of
any type of element. (The parameter that gives rise to the name “parametric” is the type
of element.) See algorithm. The identity function provides a trivial example of parametric
polymorphism.
Many mathematicians think and speak informally of a parametrically polymorphic
function as one single function. (“ . . . the identity function is injective”).
Remark 4 The concept “overloaded” is natural in computer science because
operations on diﬀerent data types are typically implemented diﬀerently. For example,
addition of integers is implemented diﬀerently from addition of ﬂoating point numbers in
most computer languages. The concept is less natural in mathematics, where you could
deﬁne the operation on the disjoint union of all the sets under consideration (for ×, the
set might be R plus the set of all 3-dimensional real vectors plus the set of all n × n real
matrices for each n). Even there, however, the implementation algorithm diﬀers for some
of the subsets. (See cases.)
Remark 5 When students start taking college mathematics, the sort of phenomena
mentioned here means that they have to read the surrounding text to understand what a
symbolic expression means: the expression is no longer self-suﬃcient. When I ﬁrst came
across this aspect of mathematics in a matrix theory course at Texas Southmost College, I
felt that I had been ejected from paradise.
See also superscript.

336

contents

wordlist

index

parameter A parameter is a variable used in the deﬁnition of a mathematical object.

When the parameters are all instantiated, the object becomes speciﬁc. The parameters
may or may not be shown explicitly in the identiﬁer for the object; see synecdoche and
suppression of parameters. See also Example 2 under deﬁnite description.
Example 1 Let [a, b] be a closed interval. Here the parameters are a and b. A
particular instantiation gives the speciﬁc closed interval [π, 2π].
Example 2 Consider the polynomial x2 + ax + b. The parameters are again a and b.
(See Remark 1 below.)
Example 3 Consider the function f (x) = x2 + ax + b. Again a and b are parameters
and x is not.
Remark 1 A parameter in a symbolic expression is necessarily a free variable, but
the converse is not true. In the polynomial x2 + ax + b mentioned in Example 2, for
example, all the variables a, b and x are free. One calls a and b parameters because the
expression x2 + ax + b is called a polynomial and because the convention is that the
variable required by the deﬁnition of polynomial is usually represented by a letter near the
end of the alphabet. Similarly, in Example 3, the variable x is not free because the
deﬁnition of polynomial requires a placeholder and the convention for deﬁning expressions
uses letters late in the alphabet for the placeholder.

337

contents

wordlist

index

parenthesis Parentheses are the symbols “(” and “)”. Parentheses are used in various
ways in expressions.

(a) Grouping Parentheses are very commonly used as bare delimiters to group
subexpressions.
Example 1 Parentheses are used for grouping in the expressions (x2 + 1)2 and
x(y + z).
(b) Tuples and matrices Parentheses may be used to denote an ordered n-tuple, as in
(3, 1, 2), and are the standard notation for matrices.
(c) Open interval The symbol (a, b) may denote the real interval {x | a < x < b}.
Citation: (Fra98.609).
(d) Greatest common divisor The symbol (m, n) may denote the greatest common divisor
of the integers m and n. Citation: (Fra98.609). Note that the citations for this and the
last usage come from the same sentence. It appears to me quite unlikely that any
experienced mathematician would be confused by that sentence. Students are another
matter.
(e) Function values It is not clear whether the use of parentheses to delimit the argument
in denoting the value of a function, in for example f (x + 1), is a simple matter of
grouping, or whether it is part of a special syntax for function application.
With some function identiﬁers the parentheses are conventionally omitted by many
authors who otherwise use them. Examples:
“sin π = 0.”
“log 3 = log 3 − log 2.”
2
“n! > 2n .”
Terminology Parentheses are also called brackets, but “bracket” may also refer to other
delimiters. Sometimes parentheses are called round parentheses for emphasis.
Citation (Yu98.656).

338

contents

wordlist

index

parenthetic assertion A symbolic assertion is parenthetic if it is embedded in a sentence

in a natural language in such a way that its pronunciation becomes a phrase (not a clause)
embedded in the sentence. In contrast, when a symbolic assertion is a clause it is
pronounced in such a way as to be a complete sentence.
Example 1
“For any x > 0 there is a y > 0 such that y < x.”
The assertion “x > 0” in isolation is a complete sentence, typically pronounced “x is
greater than 0”. In the sentence quoted above, however, it is pronounced “x greater
than 0” or “x that is greater than 0”, becoming a noun phrase embedded in the main
sentence. Note that in the quoted sentence, “x > 0” and “y > 0” are parenthetic but
“y < x” is a full clause.
Citation (Bar96.631); (BleMccSel98.535); (Dra95.258); (Pow96.879); (Zul96.227).
Remark 1 In seeking citations I was struck by the fact the some authors use
parenthetic assertions in almost every paragraph and others essentially never do this: the
latter typically use symbolic assertions only as complete clauses. Compare the articles
[Bartle, 1996] and [Neidinger and Annen III, 1996] , in the same issue of The American
Mathematical Monthly.
Example 2
“. . . we deﬁne a null set in I : = [a, b] to be a set that can be covered by a
countable union of intervals with arbitrarily small total length.”
This is from [Bartle, 1996] , page 631. It would be read in this way: “. . . we deﬁne a null
set in I, which is deﬁned to be [a, b], to be a set. . . ”. In other words, the phrase
“I : = [a, b]” is a deﬁnition occurring as a parenthetic assertion.
Example 3
“Consider the circle S 1 ⊆ C = R2 ”
This example is adapted from [Zulli, 1996] . Notice that the parenthetic remark contains
another parenthetic remark inside it.
See also context-dependent.

References [Gillman, 1987] , pages 12–13; [Krantz, 1997] , page 25.
339

contents

wordlist

index

pattern recognition Mathematicians must recognize abstract patterns that occur in

symbolic expressions, geometric ﬁgures, and in their own mental representations of
mathematical objects. This is one small aspect of human pattern recognition; for a
general view, see [Guenther, 1998] , Chapter 3.
On particular type of pattern recognition that students ﬁnd immensely diﬃcult it
recognizing that a given expression is an instance of a substitution into a known expression.
Example 1 This Handbook’s deﬁnition of “at most” says that “x is at most y”
means x ≤ y. To understand this deﬁnition requires recognizing the pattern “x is at
most y” no matter what occurs in place of x and y. For example,
“sin x is at most 1”
means that sin x ≤ 1.
Example 2 The assertion
“x2 + y 2 > 0”
has as a special case
“(−x2 − y 2 )2 + (y 2 − x2 )2 > 0.”
where you must insert appropriate parentheses. Students have trouble with expressions
such as this one not only in recognizing it as an instance of substitution but in performing
the substitution in the ﬁrst place (see substitution).
Example 3 Students in postcalculus courses must recognize patterns of proof
without being told. Examples are given under contrapositive and proof by contradiction.
Example 4 The rule for diﬀerentiation the square of a function is
“The derivative of (f (x))2 is 2f (x)f (x).”
Consider the complexities involved in using this rule to calculate the derivatives of these
functions:
1
a) x2 .
b) sin2 x (Exponent not where it is in the pattern, no parentheses around the x.)
c) e2x (What is the function? Do you recognize it as being squared?)

340

contents

wordlist

index

Remark 1 Some proofs involve recognizing that a symbolic expression or ﬁgure ﬁts a
pattern in two diﬀerent ways. This is illustrated by the next two examples. I have seen
students ﬂummoxed by Example 5, and Example 6 may for all I know be the proof that
ﬂummoxed medieval geometry students (see pons asinorum).
Example 5 In set with an associative binary operation and an identity element e,
suppose x is an element with an inverse x−1 . (In this situation, it is easy to see that x has
only one inverse.)
Theorem: (x−1 )−1 = x.
Proof: By deﬁnition of inverse, y is the inverse of x if and only if
xy = yx = e

(2)

It follows by putting x−1 for x and x for y in Equation (2) that we must show that
x−1 x = xx−1 = e

(3)

But this is true by that same Equation (2), putting x for x and x−1 for y.
Example 6 Theorem: If a triangle has two equal angles, then it has two equal sides.
Proof: In the ﬁgure below, assume ∠ABC = ∠ACB. Then triangle ABC is congruent
to triangle ACB since the sides BC and CB are equal and the adjoining angles are equal.
A
jj.
jjjj

jjjj

jjjj

j
. C
jjjj
B .j
See also explicit assertion.
Remark 2 References to the mathematical education literature on pattern
recognition are needed. References needed.
Acknowledgments Atish Bagchi.

341

contents

wordlist

permutation A permutation is deﬁned in the literature in two diﬀerent ways:

index

a) A permutation of an n-element set is a sequence of length n in which each element
of the set appears once.
b) A permutation of a set is a bijection from the set to itself.
Remark 1 Of course, the two deﬁnitions can be converted into each other, but
psychologically they are rather diﬀerent. Both deﬁnitions are given by [Kolman, Busby
and Ross, 1996] , pages 75 and 181.
Citation (JacTho90.55), (Str93.27).

342

contents

wordlist

index

Platonism Often used by mathematicians to refer to the attitude that mathematical

objects exist in some manner analogous to the existence of physical objects.
Remark 1 It appears to me that all mathematicians, whether they regard
themselves as Platonists or not, refer to mathematical objects using the same grammatical
constructions as are used for references to physical objects. For example, one refers to “a
continuous function” (indeﬁnite reference) and “the sine function” (deﬁnite reference), in
the way one refers to “a boy” and “the boss”, not in the way one refers to
nonmathematical abstract concepts such as “truth” or “gravity” (no article). (This
behavior is not limited to mathematical objects: “the orbit of the moon” for example.)
Symbols are generally used in the same way as proper nouns.
See also mathematical object and Remark 2 under symbol.

References I have not discovered studies by linguists of this phenomenon.
Terminology I doubt that the name “Platonism” is historically justiﬁed, but that is true
of the names of lots of mathematical concepts that have been given the names of people.
References needed.

343

contents

wordlist

plug into “Plug a into f ” means evaluate f at a. Here, f may be a function or an

index

expression, and a may be an expression.
Example 1 “If you plug π into the sine function, you get 0.”
Remark 1 Some ﬁnd the use of this phrase oﬀensive. I judge this to have low status.
Citations (Ken83.166), (Mcc89.1328), (TemTra92.518).

344

contents

wordlist

index

plural Many authors form the plural of certain learn`d words using endings from the
e
language from which the words originated. Students may get these wrong, and may
sometimes meet with ridicule for doing so.

(a) Plurals ending in a vowel Here are some of the common mathematical terms with
vowel plurals.
singular
plural
automaton automata
focus
foci
locus
loci
radius
radii
The plurals that end in a are often not recognized as plurals and are therefore used as
singulars. (This does not seem to happen with my students with the -i plurals.) Linguists
have noted that such plurals seem to be processed diﬀerently from s-plurals ( [Pinker and
Prince, 1999] ). In particular, when used as adjectives, most nouns appear in the singular,
but vowel-plural nouns appear in the plural: Compare “automata theory” with “group
theory”.
Interestingly, we no longer form the plural of Latin feminine nouns ending in “a” with
“ae”; nowadays one almost always says “formulas” and “parabolas” instead of “formulae”
and “parabolae”.
(b) Plurals in s with modiﬁed roots
singular plural
matrix
matrices
simplex simplices
vertex
vertices
Students recognize these as plurals but produce new singulars for the words as back
formations. For example, one hears “matricee” and “verticee” as the singular for “matrix”
and “vertex”. I have also heard “vertec”.
Remark 1 It is not unfair to say that many scholars insist on using foreign plurals as
a form of one-upmanship. But students and young professors need to be aware of these
plurals in their own self interest.
345

contents

wordlist

index

It appears to me that ridicule and put-down for using standard English plurals
instead of foreign plurals (and for mispronouncing foreign names) is much less common
than it was thirty years ago.
The use of plurals in the mathematical register is discussed under collective plural
and distributive plural.
Acknowledgments Atish Bagchi.

346

contents

wordlist

pointwise See coordinatewise.

347

index

contents

wordlist

pointy bracket See delimiter.

348

index

contents

wordlist

index

Polish notation Polish notation consists in using preﬁx notation without parentheses.

This requires that all function names have a single arity, so that which symbols apply to
which inputs is unambiguous.
Example 1 In Polish notation,
2 sin x + sin y
would be written
+ ∗ 2 sin x sin y
with ∗ denoting multiplication.
See also reverse Polish notation.
Remark 1 Polish notation originated with the Polish logic school of the 1920’s. In
particular the phrases “Polish notation” and “reverse Polish notation” originated from
that fact and were not intended as ethnic slurs.

Terminology Some authors use the phrase “Polish notation” even though parentheses are
used (they are always redundant but add intelligibility). Polish notation is occasionally
called left Polish notation.
Citations (Sin78.366), (Mck75.187), (Bau77.318).

349

contents

wordlist

polymorphic See overloaded notation.

350

index

contents

wordlist

index

pons asinorum The theorem in plane geometry that if a triangle has two equal angles

then it has two equal sides has been called the pons asinorum (bridge of donkeys) because
some students found its proof impossible to understand.
A candidate for the pons asinorum of post-calculus mathematics is mentioned under
equivalence relation.
Remark 1 I assume the “bridge” is an isosceles triangle like that in Example 6
under pattern recognition, which is drawn wider than one typically draws such triangles
nowadays. That ﬁgure reminds me of the very old arched bridges one sees here and there
in Europe, for example in Venice.

351

contents

wordlist

index

positive In most (but not all) North American texts and university courses, the phrase

“x is positive” means x > 0. In a European setting it may mean x ≥ 0. See convention
and another planet. This may have been an innovation by Bourbaki. Citations needed.

352

contents

wordlist

index

postcondition A postcondition in a deﬁnition or statement of a theorem is a condition
stated after the deﬁnition or theorem.
“If n is divisible by four then it is even. This holds for any integer n.”
The second sentence is a postcondition. Another example and a citation is given under
where. I do not have citations for postconditions that don’t use “where”. Citations
needed.

353

contents

wordlist

index

postﬁx notation Postﬁx notation consists in writing the name of the function after its

arguments.
Example 1 The expression x + y in postﬁx notation would be (x, y)+.
Citations (Yet90.44), (Fra82.41).
Most authors write functions of one variable in preﬁx notation, but some algebraists
use postﬁx notation. The factorial function is normally written in postﬁx notation.
See also Polish notation and preﬁx notation.

354

contents

wordlist

index

power The integer 53 is a power of 5 with exponent 3. One also describes 53 as “5 to the

third power”. I have seen students confused by this double usage. A statement such as “8
is a power of 2” may make the student think of 28 .
Citations (Pow96.879).

355

contents

wordlist

index

precedence If ∆ and ∗ are two binary operators, one says that ∆ has higher precedence

than ∗ if the expression x∆y ∗ z denotes (x∆y) ∗ z rather than x∆(y ∗ z).
Example 1 The expression xy + z means (xy) + z, not x(y + z), because in the
symbolic language, multiplication has higher precedence than addition.
Unary operations (functions with one input) in mathematical writing typically have
low precedence.
Example 2 One writes sin x but sin(x + y) because sin x + y may be perceived as
either ambiguous or as (sin x) + y. As this example illustrates, in the traditional symbolic
language the precedence relationship of some pairs of operations is not necessarily
well-deﬁned.
Remark 1 The metaphor behind the word “precedence” is that if one carries out a
calculation of the expression, one must apply the operator with higher precedence before
the other one. Thus in calculating (x∆y) ∗ z one calculates u = x∆y and then u ∗ z.
See delimiter and evaluation.

356

contents

wordlist

predicate See assertion.

357

index

contents

wordlist

index

preﬁx notation An expression is in preﬁx notation if the function symbols are written on

the left of the argument.
Example 1 The expression x + y written in preﬁx notation would be +(x, y)
Remark 1 In the traditional mathematical symbolic language, functions of one
variable are used in preﬁx notation but a few, for example the symbols for the factorial
and the greatest integer function, are used in other ways. Most binary operations denoted
by special nonalphabetical symbols are written in inﬁx notation, but those with
alphabetical symbols are generally written in preﬁx notation and others such as an inner
product may be written in outﬁx notation.
Citations (Yet90.44), (GraTre96.105), (Ant84.121).
See also postﬁx notation, Polish notation, reverse Polish notation and outﬁx notation.

358

contents

wordlist

index

prescriptivist A prescriptivist is someone who gives rules for which forms and syntax are
correct in English (or another language). Prescriptivists are those who say we should not
use double negatives, split inﬁnitives, and “ain’t”. Opposed to descriptivist.
Vulcanism is a special form of prescriptivism.

359

contents

wordlist

index

prime (The typographical symbol). The symbol “ ” is pronounced “prime” or “dash”.

For example, x is pronounced “x prime” or “x dash”. The pronunciation “dash” is used
mostly outside North America.

360

contents

wordlist

process See APOS and algorithm.

361

index

contents

wordlist

program See algorithm.

362

index

contents

wordlist

index

pronunciation Some students have told me that they ﬁnd it necessary to be able to

pronounce an expression that occurs in a text; if they can’t, they can’t read the text. One
student brought this up with the common notation “F : S → T ”. I would be glad to be
informed of references to this phenomenon in the mathematical education literature.
References needed.
See also plural, context-dependent and mental representation.

363

contents

wordlist

index

proof A proof is a step by step argument intended to persuade other mathematicians of

the correctness of an assertion.
Mathematical logic also has a concept called proof: that is a mathematical object
intended to model mathematicians’ proofs. Proofs in mathematical logic may be called
formal proofs, but that phrase is also used to indicate a particularly careful and detailed
proof in the ordinary sense.
The individual sentences in a proof can be classiﬁed as follows:
Proof steps A proof will contain formal mathematical statements that follow from
previous statements. We call these proof steps. They are assertions in the mathematical
register, like theorems, but unlike theorems one must deduce from the context the
hypotheses that make them true.
Restatements These state what must be proved, or, part way through a proof, what
is left to be proved or what has just been proved.
Pointers These give the location of pieces of the proof that are out of order, either
elsewhere in the current proof or elsewhere in the text or in another text. References to
another text are commonly called citations.
This discussion is drawn from [Bagchi and Wells, 1998b] . [Hanna, 1992] discusses
the role of proofs in mathematics (with lots of references to the literature) and issues for
mathematical education. Other discussions of proof in mathematical education may be
found in [Epp, 1999b] , [Nardi, 1998] .

364

contents

wordlist

index

proof by contradiction There are two somewhat diﬀerent formats for proof that
mathematicians refer to as proof by contradiction.

(a) Proof by deducing a false statement To prove P , assume P is false and deduce some
√
assertion Q that is known to be false. This is the form of one well-known proof that 2 is
irrational; one assumes it is rational and then concludes by violating the known fact that
every fraction can be reduced to lowest terms.
Authors, even writing for undergraduates, often give such a proof by contradiction
without saying they are doing it. The format of such a proof would be:
a) Theorem: P implies Q.
b) Assume P .
c) Suppose not Q.
d) Argument that R is true, where R is some statement well known to be false. The
argument that R is true will assume that P is true, usually without saying so.
e) End of proof.
The proof of Theorem 1 in [Herzog, 1998] has this form. The student must recognize the
pattern of proof by contradiction without being told that that is what it is. (See pattern
recognition.)
(b) Proof by contrapositive A proof that a conditional assertion P ⇒ Q is true may have
the following format:
a) Theorem: P implies Q.
b) Assume that P is true and Q is false.
c) Argument that not P follows from not Q.
d) Conclude that P and not P , a contradiction.
e) End of proof.
Most commonly, P is a conjunction of several hypothesis and one concludes that one of
the hypotheses is false (hence the conjunction is also false).
Remark 1 It is usually much simpler to prove the contrapositive directly (as
described in the entry under contrapositive) instead of carrying out the procedure
described in the preceding paragraph.
Citations (Kra95.40).
365

contents

wordlist

index

Remark 2 As citation (Bry93.42) exempliﬁes, a proof P ⇒ Q will frequently contain
a subproof of some statement R which has the form of proving (not R ⇒ not P ).
References [Krantz, 1997] , page 68, discusses how to write proofs by contradiction.
Acknowledgments Atish Bagchi.

366

contents

wordlist

index

proof by instruction A proof by instruction consists of instructions as to how to write a
proof or how to modify a given proof to obtain another one. They come in several types.
Geometric instructions As an example, I could have worded the proof in Example 6
under pattern recognition this way: “Flip triangle ABC around the bisector of side BC
and you must get the same triangle since a side and two adjoining angles are equal. Thus
AB = AC.”
Citations needed.
Algebraic instructions An example is the instruction in Example 1 under look ahead
to divide the Pythagorean identity a2 + b2 = c2 by c2 to obtain the identity
sin2 θ + cos2 θ = 1.
Citations (Ant84.113), (Pol65.7).
Proof modiﬁcation This is the sort of instruction such as “interchange the role of x
and y in the preceding proof and you get a proof of . . . ”.
Citation (Fin99.774). Citations needed.

367

contents

wordlist

index

proper A subset T of a set S is a proper subset if it is not S. This is also used with
substructures of a structure (proper subgroup, and so on.)
Citations (GraTre96.234), (LeeMye99.428).
See also trivial.

368

contents

wordlist

property A property that an instance of a class of mathematical objects may have

index

determines a subclass of those objects.
Example 1 Being even is a property that integers may have. This property
determines a subset of integers, namely the set of even integers.
One states that an object has a property using a form of “to be” and an adjective or
a noun.
Example 2 One can say
“4 is even.”
or
“4 is an even integer.”
Citations (Gro78.537), (KupPri84.86), (Mol97.531).
In some cases the property may also be given by a verb. See vanish for examples.
Remark 1 Some authors and editors object to using a property named after a
person as an adjective. Instead of saying “The space S is Hausdorﬀ” they would prefer “S
is a Hausdorﬀ space.”
Remark 2 Mathematical texts sometimes identify a property with the class of
objects having that property. (Similarly one may deﬁne a relation as a set of ordered
pairs.) In my experience, this causes students quite a bit of diﬃculty at ﬁrst.

369

contents

wordlist

index

proposition Proposition is used as another word for theorem. Some texts distinguish

between propositions and theorems, reserving the word “theorem” for those that are
considered especially important. This is the practice in [Epp, 1995] , for example (see her
discussion on page 129).
Citation (Epp95.2).
The word “proposition” is used in some texts to denote an assertion that is deﬁnitely
true or deﬁnitely false.
Citation (Ros91.6).

370

contents

wordlist

index

prototype Commonly a human concept has typical members, called prototypes by

Lakoﬀ.
Example 1 For most of us, a sparrow is a prototypical bird, and a penguin is not.
Example 2 Many students believe the myth that a sequence that has a limit
“approaches the limit but never get there”. They have presumably constructed their
prototypical sequence based on the examples they have seen in class or in the text, most
of which behave that way. This phenomenon is discussed in detail by [Cornu, 1992] and
[Tall and Vinner, 1981] .
The concept of “prototype” is subtle; these examples only hints at its depth. See also
radial concept.

371

contents

wordlist

provided that Used like if to give a deﬁnition.
Example 1 “The integer n is squarefree provided that no square of a prime
divides n.” Also providing that.
Citations (Str93.3). Citations needed.
Acknowledgments Atish Bagchi.

372

index

contents

wordlist

put Used in deﬁnitions, mainly to deﬁne a symbol.
Example 1 “Put f (x) = x2 sin x.”
Citation (BasKul90.845).

373

index

contents

wordlist

Q The symbol Q usually denotes the set of rational numbers.
Citation (DavPri90.3).

374

index

contents

wordlist

index

quantiﬁer In this text, a quantiﬁer is either the existential quantiﬁer or the universal
quantiﬁer. Linguists and logicians study other quantiﬁers not discussed here.

375

contents

wordlist

R The symbol R usually denotes the set of real numbers.

376

index

contents

wordlist

index

radial concept A radial concept or radial category is a concept with some central

prototypical examples and other examples described by phrases using the basic name of
the concept that deviate from the prototypical examples in various ways.
Some members of a radial category deviate only slightly from the prototypes; others
are highly metaphorical. The members are not automatically generated from the
prototypical examples; membership is to a considerable extent a matter of convention.
Example 1 The concept of “mother” is a radial concept. Various members of the
category amond English-speakers include birth mother, adoptive mother, foster mother,
earth mother, stepmother, grandmother, mother-in-law, motherboard, mother lode and
mother of pearl.
Remark 1 Our mental representation of the world is to a great extent organized
around radial categories. The practice of adding new deviant members to a radial
category is common and largely unconscious. That explains the origin of phrases such as
“incomplete proof”, “multivalued function”, “left identity” and so on. According to the
very special way mathematical concepts are formulated, by accumulation of attributes, an
incomplete proof is not a proof, a multivalued function is not a function, and a left
identity is not an identity. Fundamentalists may object to such usages, but they are
ﬁghting a losing battle against a basic method built into the human brain for organizing
our mental representation of the world.

Acknowledgments The name “radial” and the mother examples come from [Lakoﬀ, 1986] .
Also thanks to Gerard Buskes.

377

contents

wordlist

index

range Depending on the text, the range of a function can denote either the codomain or
the image. The texts [Krantz, 1995] takes the ﬁrst approach, and [Epp, 1995] and
[Grassman and Tremblay, 1996] take the second approach.

378

contents

wordlist

index

real number A real number is the sort of number used in freshman calculus courses. The

word real is frequently used as an adjective, as in “Let x be real.”
Remark 1 I have heard students use the phrase “real number” to mean “genuine
number”, that is, not a variable.
Remark 2 Computer languages typically treat integers as if they were distinct from
real numbers. In particular, many languages have the convention that the expression 2
denotes the integer and the expression 2.0 denotes the real number. I have known students
who assumed that professors of mathematics were all familiar with this fact (probably
nearly true in recent years) and that we all use notation this way (almost never true).
Citations (CalVel93.373), (RabGil93.168).

379

contents

wordlist

index

recall Used before giving a deﬁnition, theorem or proof.
Example 1 “Recall that an integer is even if it is divisible by 2.” The intent seems
to be that the author expects that the reader already knows the meaning of the deﬁned
term, but just in case here is a reminder. See Remark 5 under mathematical deﬁnition.
Citation (Fou93.377), (Fri95.29).

380

contents

wordlist

reconstructive generalization See generalization.

381

index

contents

wordlist

index

redundant A given discourse is redundant if it contains words and expressions that could

be omitted without changing the meaning. As an example, type labeling is a form of
redundancy.
Another form of redundancy occurs in deﬁnitions. For example, the deﬁnitions of
partition and of equivalence relation in Examples 2 and 3 under fundamentalist both
mention the set S as part of the basic data. Giving S is redundant in both cases, in the
sense that partitions and reﬂexive relations both determine the set on which they are
deﬁned. Including the underlying set of a structure in a deﬁnition even when the
requirements determine the underlying set is the main instance I know of where it is
conventional to include redundant data in a deﬁnition. (Rudin [1966] point out this
phenomenon on page 21.)
There are some other examples where the deﬁnition is redundant and the redundancy
cannot be described as a matter of convention. For example, in deﬁning a group one
usually requires an identity and that every element have a two-sided inverse; in fact, a left
identity and left inverses with respect to the left identity are enough. In this case it is
properties, rather than data, that are redundant. See radial concept.

Acknowledgments Michael Barr.

382

contents

wordlist

register A register in linguistics is a choice of grammatical constructions, level of

index

formality and other aspects of the language, suitable for use in a given social context. The
scientiﬁc register is the distinctive register for writing and speaking about science. It is
marked in particular by the use of complex nominal phrases connected by verbs that
describe relations rather than actions. That register and the diﬃculties students have with
it is discussed in detail in [Halliday and Martin, 1993] . In that book the scientiﬁc register
is called “scientiﬁc English”, but the remarks in chapters 3 and 5 make it clear that the
authors regard scientiﬁc English as a register. A distinctive subregister of the scientiﬁc
register is used in mathematics, namely the mathematical register.

383

contents

wordlist

index

reiﬁcation The mental process whereby a collection of processes and data is conceived of
as a single mathematical object capable of being (for example) an element of a set or the
input to a function. Also called entiﬁcation or encapsulation.

References This concept is discussed by Sfard [1992] (in connection with understanding
functions) and [1994] . She gives many useful references to the literature. Students also
have problems with reifying sets; this is discussed in [Lakoﬀ and N´nez, 1997] . See also
u˜
mathematical object and metaphor.

384

contents

wordlist

index

relation Texts frequently deﬁne a (binary) relation on a set S to be a subset of the

cartesian product S × S. The relation in use, however, behaves like a two-place predicate.
This caused much cognitive dissonance among my students. See also property.
Citations (Epp95.534).

385

contents

wordlist

representation Mathematicians and their students make use of both external

index

representations and internal representations of mathematical objects. These phrases are
used in the mathematical education literature. I take internal representations to be the
same thing as mental representations or concept images.
An external representation of a phenomenon is a mathematical or symbolic system
intended to allow one to deduce assertions about the phenomenon. Certain aspects of the
phenomenon being represented are identiﬁed with certain mathematical objects; thus a
representation involves a type of conceptual blend.
This is related to and may for some purposes be regarded as the same as the concept
of model. The diﬀerence is that the word “representation” is more likely to be used
(except by logicians) when mathematical objects are the phenomena being represented
and “model” is more often used when physical phenomena are being represented by
mathematical objects. This distinction must be regarded as preliminary and rough; it is
not based on citations.
Example 1 The decimal notation for the integers, together with the grade school
algorithms for adding and multiplying them, is an external representation of the integers
and of some common operations available for them.
Example 2 Some of the ways in which one may represent functions are: as sets of
ordered pairs, as algorithms, as maps (in the everyday sense) or other pictures, and as
black boxes with input and output.
Other examples occur under model.
Note from these examples that the internal and external representations of an idea
are not sharply distinguished from one another. In particular, the internal representation
will in general involve the symbolism and terminology of the external representation, as
well as nonverbal and nonsymbolic images and relationships.
The book [Janvier, 1987] is a primary source of information about representations.
[Thompson, 1994] discussions confusions in the concept of representation on pages 39ﬀ.
See also [Vinner and Dreyfus, 1989] .
Remark 1 Of course, “representation” is also a mathematical word with various
deﬁnitions in diﬀerent disciplines. These deﬁnitions are generally abstractions of the
386

contents

wordlist

concept of representation discussed here.

387

index

contents

wordlist

index

respectively Used to indicate term-by-term coreference between two lists of objects.
Rarely used with lists with more than two entries.
Example 1 “The smallest prime divisors of 9 and 10 are 3 and 2, respectively.”
Citations (Bur94.17), (Kra95.57), (Ros93.293).
See also comma, as well as citation (Niv56.41).

388

contents

wordlist

index

result A result is a mathematical fact that has been proved. The value produced by a
computation is also called a result.
Citations (Bur97.55), (Mcc89.1328).
See also example.

389

contents

wordlist

index

reverse Polish notation A form of postﬁx notation that is used without parentheses.
This requires that the arity of all the symbols used be ﬁxed.
Example 1 In reverse Polish notation,
2 sin x + sin y
would be written
x sin 2 ∗ y sin +
with ∗ denoting multiplication.
Citation (Sin78.366).
Reverse Polish notation is used by some Hewlett-Packard calculators and by the
computer languages Forth and Postscript. It has come into prominence because
expressions in a reverse Polish language are already in the form needed for an interpreter
or compiler to process them.
See Polish notation. Reverse Polish notation is sometimes called right Polish
notation.

390

contents

wordlist

revise In the United States, to “revise” a document means to change it, hopefully

index

improving it in the process. Speakers inﬂuenced by British English use “revise” to mean
“review”; in particular, students may talk about revising for an upcoming test.
Remark 1 This entry has nothing directly to do with mathematics, but I have
several times witnessed the confusion it can cause in academic circles and so thought it
worth including here.

391

contents

wordlist

rewrite using deﬁnitions One of the secrets of passing a ﬁrst course in abstract

index

mathematics that teaches proofs (ﬁrst algebra course, ﬁrst discrete math course, advanced
calculus, and so on) is to take every statement to be proved and ﬁrst rewrite it using the
deﬁnitions of the terms in the statement. It is remarkably diﬃcult to convince students to
try this. See trivial and unwind.

392

contents

wordlist

index

root A root of an equation f (x) = 0 is a value c for which f (c) = 0. This value c is also

called a root or a zero of the function f .
Remark 1 Some hold it to be incorrect to refer c as a “root of f ” instead of “zero of
f ”, although I have not been able to ﬁnd a statement to that eﬀect in print. The practice
is quite widespread, particularly when the function is a polynomial. References needed.
Citations (Bre71.592), (Pin64.108).
Remark 2 “Root” is of course used with a diﬀerent but related meaning in phrases
such as “square root”, “nth root”, and so on.

Acknowledgments Gary Tee.

393

contents

wordlist

round parentheses See delimiter.

394

index

contents

wordlist

index

sanity check A simple test to check if something you have formulated makes sense.
Example 1 If you write down 6s = p for the student-professor problem and check
your work by plugging in s = 12, p = 2, you immediately discover your error.

395

contents

wordlist

index

satisfy A mathematical structure satisﬁes an assertion that contains variables if the

assertion makes a meaningful statement about the structure that becomes true for every
possible instantiation of the variables.
Example 1 “Every group satisﬁes the statement ∀x∃y(xyx = x).”
Citation (Fra98.614).

396

contents

wordlist

index

say Used to signal that a deﬁnition is being given.
Example 1 “We say that an integer n is even if n is divisible by 2.” Variation:
“An integer n is said to be even if it is divisible by 2.”
The word “say” is also used to introduce notation or to give an example.
Example 2 Let f (x) be a polynomial, say
f (x) = a0 + a1 x + . . . + an xn
Example 3 Let p be a prime, say 23.
Remark 1 Note that the syntax of the two meanings is diﬀerent.
Citations (Niv56.41), (GraTre96.105), (Mol97.531).
Acknowledgments Atish Bagchi

397

contents

wordlist

schema See APOS.

398

index

contents

wordlist

index

scope In a symbolic expression, a variable is within the scope of an operator if its

meaning or use is aﬀected by the operator. I will discuss the use of this word here only for
operators that bind variables.
Example 1 In the expression
b

a

x2 dx

the variable x is bound by the integral operator.
Example 2 In the expression
b
a

(x + y)2 dx

the x is bound but not the y, so that one would expect the value to be in terms of a, b and
y, but not x.
Example 3 In the expression
x < 2 or ∀x(x > 0)
the ﬁrst occurrence of x is not bound by the ∀ operator, but the x in “x > 0” is bound. In
particular, one can substitute for the ﬁrst x only. Thus an instance of that expression is
the (false) statement
5 < 2 or ∀x(x > 0)
It would not make sense to write
5 < 2 or ∀5(5 > 0)
See bound variable.
Remark 1 A mathematical deﬁnition of scope, like that of bound variable, requires a
formal recursive deﬁnition of “symbolic expression”. The deﬁnition given in this article is
a dictionary deﬁnition. This is discussed in more detail in Remark 2 under free variable.

399

contents

wordlist

index

self-monitoring Self-monitoring is the activity a student engages in when she notices

that some practice she uses in solving problems is counterproductive (or is helpful) and
modiﬁes her behavior accordingly. It is discussed in [Resnick, 1987] , [Schoenfeld, 1987b] ,
and [Wells, 1995] .

400

contents

wordlist

index

semantic contamination The connotations of a word or phrase that has been given a

mathematical deﬁnition sometimes creates an expectation in the reader that the word or
phrase has a certain meaning, diﬀerent from its actual meaning given by the deﬁnition.
This is semantic contamination. It is a form of cognitive dissonance. In this case the two
modes of learning in the deﬁnition of cognitive dissonance are learning the meaning from
the deﬁnition and learning the meaning implicitly from connotations of the word used
(which is a common mode of learning in the humanities.) A mathematics student may
suppress the information given by the deﬁnition and rely only on the connotations.
Examples of semantic contamination related to implication are given under
conditional assertion, contrapositive and only if. Some other illustrative examples are
given here.
Example 1 The word “formula” is used informally to mean an expression such as
H2 O that describes the composition of a chemical. However, in many texts in
mathematical logic ( [Mendelson, 1987] , [Ebbinghaus, Flum and Thomas, 1984] , [van
Dalen, 1989] ), a formula is a formal expression that in the intended semantics has a truth
value when the variables are instantiated; it is thus a symbolic assertion. Thus “x + 2y” is
not a formula (it is a term), but “(x > y)” and x + y = z” are formulas. When teaching
logic, I have frequently witnessed the diﬃculties students have had in remembering the
diﬀerence in meaning between a formula and a term in this context.
Remark 1 In this Handbook the word assertion is usually used instead of “formula”.
Example 2 The text [Dym and Ivey, 1980] , page 76, states that the assumption
that discrete data (they were referring to samples of noise levels) can be plotted as a
continuous curve is referred to as the continuum hypothesis. In this case the authors
presumably assumed they knew what the phrase meant without checking the deﬁnition at
all. This may deserve criticism, even severe criticism. Nevertheless, in reading for college
courses in the humanities this a common way for students to pick up on the meanings of
unfamiliar words or phrases.

Terminology The name “semantic contamination” is due to Pimm [1987] , page 88.
References [Hersh, 1997a] gives many examples of disparities between the ordinary
meaning and the mathematical meaning of mathematical words. Any of them could be
401

contents

wordlist

the source of semantic contamination.

402

index

contents

wordlist

index

semantics A semantics is a method of determining the meaning of an expression in a

natural or artiﬁcial language or in a system of notation.
Example 1 Symbolic expressions in the mathematical register have both intensional
(note the spelling) and extensional semantics. Speaking very roughly, the intensional
semantics carries information concerning how its meaning is constructed or calculated; the
extensional semantics is merely the mathematical object(s) denoted by the expression. For
example, the intensional interpretation of
3+5
2
for a mathematician is something like:
“The result of adding 5 and 3 and dividing the result by 2.”
For a student, the intensional meaning might be imperative:
“Add 5 to 3 and divide the result by 2.”
The extensional interpretation of that fraction is 4. Another example of this is given in
Example 1 under equation.
Example 2 The semantics of natural languages is currently the object of intensive
study by linguists. Good starting places to ﬁnd out about this are [Chierchia and
McConnell-Ginet, 1990] and [Partee, 1996] . Some of what semanticists have learned
sheds light on students’ misunderstandings: see for example the related discussions of
deﬁnite article, indeﬁnite article, universal quantiﬁer and existential quantiﬁer.
Example 3 Mathematical logic typically constructs an interpretation of a text in
some formal language. For example, an interpretation of the symbolic assertion x + 2 = 7
might take the universe of the interpretation to be the set of integers, and could interpret
x as 2. A familiar semantics for algebraic expressions causes it to be interpreted as the
assertion that 4 = 7, and under the usual method of determining truth for that
assignment, this statement is “invalid” in that interpretation. If x is interpreted as 5 then
the symbolic assertion is valid for that interpretation. One also says that 5 satisﬁes the
assertion but 2 does not.

403

contents

wordlist

index

Remark 1 Many computer scientists use the word “semantics” to mean
interpretation in the sense it is used in the Handbook. Here, a semantics is a method of
interpretation, not a particular interpretation.

404

contents

wordlist

set [1] (Verb). Use in deﬁnitions, usually to deﬁne a symbol.
Example 1 “Set f (t) = 3t2 .”
Citation (Ant80.364).

405

index

contents

wordlist

index

set [2] (Noun). In abstract mathematics courses one may be tempted to “deﬁne” set,

only to quail at the prospect of presenting Zermelo-Fr¨nkel set theory. This may result in
a
a total cop-out accompanied by mutterings about collections of things. One way out is to
give a speciﬁcation for sets. Two crucial properties of sets that students need to know are
a) A set is not the same thing as its elements.
b) A set is determined completely by what its elements are.
Most facts about sets as used in undergraduate mathematics courses are made
reasonable by knowing these two facts. See also element, empty set and setbuilder
notation.

References [Wells, 1995] , [Wells, 1997] .
Diﬃculties In advanced mathematics course structures such as quotient groups are built
on sets whose elements are sets; this requires reifying the sets involved. See [Lakoﬀ and
N´nez, 1997] .
u˜
Students sometimes express discomfort when faced with sets that seem too arbitrary.
See yes it’s weird.

406

contents

wordlist

index

setbuilder notation The expression {x | P (x)} deﬁnes a set. Its elements are exactly

those x for which the predicate P (x) is true. (The type of x is often deduced from the
context.) This is called setbuilder notation (a low-status name) or set comprehension (a
higher status but confusing name). Setbuilder notation is a form of structural notation.

Diﬃculties The basic rule of inference for setbuilder notation is that P (a) is true if and
only if a ∈ {x | P (x)}. This means in particular that if P (a) then a ∈ {x | P (x)}, and if
not P (a), then a ∈ {x | P (x)}. Students may fail to make use of the latter fact.
/
Variations A colon is used by many authors instead of a vertical line.
One may put an expression before the vertical line. This can be misleading.
Example 1 The set {x2 | x ∈ R and x = 3} does contain 9, because 9 = (−3)2 .
[Gries and Schneider, 1993] , Chapter 11, give examples that show that putting an
expression before the vertical line can be ambiguous. They introduce a more elaborate
notation that eliminates the ambiguity.
Citation (Fra82.41), (KolBusRos96.109), and (for the colon variation) (Bri93.782).

407

contents

wordlist

index

show To prove (see proof). Some scientists and possibly some high school teachers use

“show” in a meaning that is something like “provide evidence for” or “illustrate”. It
appears to me that the collegiate level usage is that “show” is synonymous with “prove”,
but I don’t have citations. Citations needed.
Comments on this point would be welcome. See [Maurer, 1991] , page 15.
Citation (EdgUllWes97.574).

408

contents

wordlist

index

snow Professors sometimes try to snow the students, meaning to confront them with

unbelievable or diﬃcult to understand assertions without preparing the ground; this is
done in an eﬀort to make them realize just how wonderfully knowledgable the professor is
and what worms the students are. (This use of the word “snow” is old slang, probably
dying out.)
Notions of inﬁnite cardinality are a favorite tool for such putdowns. Thus it is a scam
to try to startle or mystify students with statements such as “There are just as many even
integers as integers!” The would-be snower is taking advantage of the mathematician’s use
of “same number of elements” as a metaphor for inﬁnite sets in bijective correspondence, a
metaphor with severe limitations of applicability. (See [Lakoﬀ and N´nez, 2000] , pages
u˜
142–144.)
That scam is like asking a student “Please bring me that stick over there on the other
blackboard” without mentioning the fact that you have decided to call a piece of chalk a
“stick”. It is true that there is some analogy between a piece of chalk and a stick (more
than, say, between a piece of chalk and an elf), but I would expect the student to look
confusedly for a long narrow thing made out of wood, not immediately guessing that you
meant the piece of chalk.
Remark 1 Math majors are well known for trying to snow each other, too.

409

contents

wordlist

index

some The word some is used in the mathematical register to indicate the existential
quantiﬁer. Some examples are given under existential quantiﬁer.

410

contents

wordlist

space

411

index

contents

wordlist

index

speciﬁcation A speciﬁcation of a mathematical concept describes the way the concept is

used in suﬃcient detail for the purposes of a particular course or text, but does not give a
mathematical deﬁnition. Speciﬁcations are particularly desirable in courses for students
beginning abstract mathematics for concepts such as set, function and “ordered pair”
where the standard deﬁnitions are either diﬃcult or introduce irrelevant detail. Examples
may be found under set and function.

References [Wells, 1995] and [Bagchi and Wells, 1998b] .
Remark 1 On pages 48ﬀ of [Rota, 1996] the distinction is made between
“description” and “deﬁnition” in mathematics. As an example of a description which is
not a deﬁnition, he mentions D. C. Spencer’s characterization of a tensor as “an object
that transforms according to the following rules”. That sounds mighty like a speciﬁcation
to me.
Remark 2 Deﬁnitions in category theory, for example of “product”, are often simply
precise speciﬁcations. That is revealed by the fact that a product of sets in the categorical
sense is not a uniquely deﬁned set in the way it appears to be in the classical deﬁnition as
a set of ordered pairs. Category theory has thus made the practice of speciﬁcation into a
precise and dependable tool.

412

contents

wordlist

split deﬁnition A deﬁnition by cases.

413

index

contents

wordlist

index

square bracket Square brackets are the delimiters [ ]. They are occasionally used as bare
delimiters, and may be used instead of parentheses to enclose the argument to a function
in an expression of its value (as in f [x] instead of f (x)). They are also used as outﬁx
notation with other special meanings, for example to denote closed intervals. See bracket.
Citations (DarGof70.729), (Dum95.1419), (FeeMar00.381), (Sta70b.884),
(Tew70.730).

414

contents

wordlist

squiggle See tilde.

415

index

contents

wordlist

index

standard interpretation The standard interpretation of a mathematical discourse is the
meaning a mathematician competent in a given ﬁeld will understand from a discourse
belonging to that ﬁeld. (One aspect of being “competent”, of course, is familiarity with
the standard interpretation!)
I will state two theses about the standard interpretation here and make some
comments.

(a) First thesis There is such a thing as the standard interpretation and it is a proper
subject for study in linguistics.
My evidence for this is that for most mathematical discourse, most mathematicians in
the appropriate ﬁeld who read it will agree on its meaning (and will mark students’ papers
wrong if they have a nonstandard interpretation). Furthermore, rules for how the
interpretation is carried out can be apparently formulated for much of the symbolic part
(see the discussion of Mathematica R under symbolic language), and some of the structure
of the expressions that communicate logical reasoning is used outside mathematics and
has been the subject of intensive study by semanticists; for example, see [Chierchia and
McConnell-Ginet, 1990] and [Kamp and Reyle, 1993] .
My claim that most of the time mathematicians agree on the meaning of what they
read must be understood in the way that the claims of physics are understood. If an
experiment disagrees with an established law, the experimenter can often discover a ﬂaw
that explains the disagreement. If mathematicians disagree about the meaning of a text,
they often discover a ﬂaw as well: one of them had the wrong deﬁnition of a word, they
come to agree that the text is genuinely ambiguous, or the author tells them about a typo
...
(b) Second thesis One of the major tasks of an instructor in mathematics is to show a
student how to extract correctly the standard interpretation of a piece of text.
This thesis is based on my own experience. I have always been sensitive to
language-based misunderstandings, and not just in mathematics. I have kept records of
such misunderstandings and learned some basic ideas of linguistics as a result of my
curiosity about them. It appears to me from my teaching experience that language based
misunderstandings are a common cause of problems in learning mathematics at the
416

contents

wordlist

index

post-calculus level.
My perceptions may be a case of “I have a hammer so everything looks like a nail”.
And adherents of the osmosis theory will reject my eﬀorts on principle.

417

contents

wordlist

index

status I have had a few experiences that lead me to believe that some phrases in the

mathematical register are “in” (have high status) and others are “out” (low status).
Example 1 To some mathematicians, “dummy variable” may sound high-schoolish
and low status; it is much more reﬁned to say “bound variable”.
Example 2 The phrase “setbuilder notation” may have lower status than
“comprehension”.
Remark 1 Variations in status no doubt diﬀer in diﬀerent mathematical disciplines.
Remark 2 I believe that in both examples just given, the low status word is much
more likely to be understood by high school and beginning college students in the USA.
Remark 3 A reviewer of a book I wrote said, “ . . . and he even referred to ‘setbuilder
notation’ . . . ” without any further explanation as to why that was a bad thing. I was
mightily puzzled by that remark until it occurred to me that status might be involved.
See also plug into.

418

contents

wordlist

structure See mathematical structure.

419

index

contents

wordlist

index

structural notation Structural notation for a mathematical object is a symbolic

expression that, in the given context, describes the (possibly variable) mathematical object
unambiguously without providing an symbol for it. Also called anonymous notation.
Example 1 The expression {1, 2, 4} is structural notation for the unique set that
contains the elements 1, 2 and 4 and no other elements.
Example 2 The expression
a2 ab
−ab b2
is structural notation for a matrix, given the parameters a and b.
Example 3 Setbuilder notation is a type of systematic structural notation. So are
barred arrow notation and lambda notation for functions.

420

contents

wordlist

index

subscript A string of characters is a subscript to a character if the string is placed

immediately after the character and below the base line of the text.
Example 1 In the expression x23 , the string 23 is a subscript to x.
Subscripts are normally used for indexing.
Example 2 The tuple a = (3, 1, 5) is determined by the fact that a1 = 3, a2 = 1, and
a3 = 5.
Example 3 The Fibonacci sequence f0 , f1 , . . . is deﬁned by f0 = 0, f1 = 1, and
fi = fi−1 + fi−2 for i > 1. (Some authors deﬁne f0 = 1.)

Diﬃculties The tuple in Example 2 can be seen as a function on the set {1, 2, 3} (“a tuple
is a function on its index set”), and the Fibonacci sequence can be seen as a function on
the nonnegative integers. The ith entry of Fibonacci sequence could thus be written
indiﬀerently as fi or f (i). This fact is familiar to working mathematicians, but in a
classroom where the Fibonacci function is denoted by fi a remark such as
“The Fibonacci sequence is an increasing function of i.”
can cause considerable confusion to beginners.
Subscripts may also be used to denote partial derivatives.
Example 4 If F (x, y) = x2 y 3 then Fx = 2xy 3 .
Citations (Bar96.631). Citations needed.

421

contents

wordlist

index

substitution To substitute an expression e for a variable x that occurs in an expression t
is to replace every occurrence of x by e (in a sophisticated way — see the remarks under
“Diﬃculties” below). The expression resulting from the substitution has a possibly
diﬀerent denotation which can generally be determined from the syntax.
Example 1 Let e be x + y and t be 2u. Then substituting t for x in e yields 2u + y.

Diﬃculties The act of substituting may require insertion of parentheses and other
adjustments to the expression containing the variable. In general, substituting is not a
mechanical act, but requires understanding the syntax of the expression.
Example 2 Substituting 2u for x in x2 + 2x + y gives (2u)2 + 2(2u) + y; note the
changes that have to be made from a straight textual substitution.
Example 3 Substituting 4 for x in the expression 3x results in 12, not 34 (!).
Example 4 Suppose f (x, y) = x2 − y 2 . What is f (y, x)? What is f (x, x)? Many
students have trouble with this kind of question.
See also pattern recognition.
Remark 1 A fundamental fact about the syntax and semantics of all mathematical
expressions (as far as I know) is that substitution commutes with evaluation. This means
that if you replace a subexpression by its value the value of the containing expression
remains the same. For example, if you instantiate the variable x in the expression 3x + y
with 4 and replace the subexpression 3x by its value 12, you get the expression 12 + y,
which must have the same value as 3x + y as long as x has the value 4. This is a basic fact
about manipulating mathematical expressions.
Acknowledgments Michael Barr.

422

contents

wordlist

index

such that For a predicate P , a phrase of the form “c such that P (c)” means that P (c)

holds.
Example 1 “Let n be an integer such that n > 2.” means that in the following
assertions that refer to n, one can assume that n > 2.
Example 2 “The set of all integers n such that n > 2.” refers to the set {n | n > 2}.
(See setbuilder notation.)
Remark 1 Note that in pronouncing ∃xP (x) the phrase “such that” is usually
inserted. This is not done for the universal quantiﬁer.
Example 3 “∃x(x > 0)” is pronounced “There is an x such that x is greater than 0”,
but “∀x(x > 0)” is pronounced “For all x, x is greater than 0”.
Remark 2 Yes, I know that “∀x(x > 0)” is false.

Acknowledgments Susanna Epp.

423

contents

wordlist

index

suﬃcient P is suﬃcient for Q if P implies Q. Examples are given under conditional
assertion.

424

contents

wordlist

index

superscript A string of characters is a superscript to a character if the string is placed

immediately after the character and raised above the base line of the text.
Example 1 In the expression x23 , the string 23 is a superscript to x.
Superscripts are used in many ways:
a) To indicate a power (including the Cartesian power of a set). Citation:
(BumKocWes93b.499), (KloAleLar93.757), (Pow96.879).
b) As an index. A superscript used as an index may indicate contravariance. Citation:
(Fra98.609).
c) To indicate the domain of a function space. Citation: (Bar96.631).
d) To indicate the dimension of a space. Citation: (Zul96.227).
e) As a bound on an operator. Citation: (Mea93.387), (GelOlm90.65).
f) A few authors use a superscript to the left of the base character, as in 23 x, Citation:
(Tit64.321).

Diﬃculties Superscripting numbers is a heavily overloaded operation. A serious confusion
in lower level college math courses occurs between f −1 as the reciprocal of a function and
f −1 as the inverse.
Remark 1 Sometimes in my classes students give answers that show they think that
the Cartesian power {1, 2, 3}2 is {1, 4, 9}.

425

contents

wordlist

suppose Discussed under let.

426

index

contents

wordlist

index

suppression of parameters An identiﬁer or other mathematical notation may omit a

parameter on which the meaning of the notation depends.
Example 1 A common form of suppression of parameters is to refer to a
mathematical structure by its underlying set. Thus a group with underlying set G and
binary operation ∗ may be called G, so that the notation omits the binary operation. This
is also an example of synecdoche.
Example 2 A parameter that is suppressed from the notation may or may not be
announced explicitly in the text. For example, a text may, by the expression log x, refer to
the logarithm with base e, and may or may not announce this fact explicitly. Note that
this is not an example of synecdoche.
See also abuse of notation.

427

contents

wordlist

index

surjective A function f : A → B is surjective if for every element b of B there is an

element a of A such that f (a) = b. One also says f is onto B.
Remark 1 Strictly speaking one should either adopt the stance that every function
is equipped with a codomain, or one should always attach a phrase of the form “onto B”
to any occurrence of the word “surjective”. Citations needed.
See also trivial and Remark 3 under injective.

428

contents

wordlist

index

symbol A symbol is an identiﬁer used in the symbolic language which is a minimal

arrangement of characters. “Minimal” means it is not itself constructed of (mathematical)
symbols by the rules of construction of symbolic expressions.
Example 1 The symbol for the ratio between the circumference and the diameter of
a circle is “π”. This is a mathematical symbol consisting of one character.
Example 2 The symbol for the sine function is sin. This is a symbol made up of
three characters. Although one of the characters is i and i is itself a symbol, its role in the
symbol “sin” is purely as a character. (One could think “sin” is the product of s, i and n,
and indeed students do sometimes assume such things, but that would not be the author’s
intent.)
This is in contrast to the role of i in the symbolic expression 3i2 , a compound
expression (not called a symbol in this Handbook) whose meaning is determined
synthetically by the meanings of the symbols 3, i and 2 and the way they are arranged.
Remark 1 Many authors, for example [Fearnley-Sander, 1982] and [Harel and
Kaput, 1992] , use “symbol” to mean what I call symbolic expression. Others use
“symbol” to mean character.
Remark 2 The syntax of symbols and symbolic expressions in the mathematical
register needs analysis. It appears to me that they are treated like proper nouns: In
particular, they don’t take the article.
Example 3 Compare “Sym3 is noncommutative” with “Flicka is a horse”.
They are also used in apposition like proper nouns.
Example 4 Compare “The group Sym3 ” with “my friend Flicka” or “that boy
Albert”.
This applies to variables as well as determinate symbols, as in “the quantity x2 + 1”
and “for all integers n”.
See also name.

References This discussion derives in part from [de Bruijn, 1994] , page 876.

429

contents

wordlist

symbolic assertion See assertion.

430

index

contents

wordlist

index

symbolic expression A symbolic expression (or just expression) is a collection of

mathematical symbols arranged
a) according to the commonly accepted rules for writing mathematics, or
b) according to some mathematical deﬁnition of a formal language.
Every expression is either a term or an symbolic assertion.
The meaning of a symbolic expression is normally determined synthetically from the
arrangement and the meanings of the individual symbols. In particular, every symbol is a
symbolic expression.
Example 1 The expressions x2 and sin2 π mentioned under symbol are symbolic
expressions. “sin2 π” is an arrangement of three symbols, namely sin, 2 and π. The
arrangement itself is meaningful; “sin2 π” is not the same symbolic expression as 2 sin π
even though they have the same value; see semantics.
Remark 1 As the example indicates, the “arrangement” need not be a string.
An expression may contain a subexpression. The rules for forming expressions and
the use of delimiters allow one to determine the subexpressions.
Example 2 The subexpressions in x2 are x2 , x and 2. Two of the subexpressions in
(2x + 5)3 are 2x and 2x + 5. The rules of algebra require the latter to be inclosed in
parentheses, but not the former.
Example 3 Is sin π a subexpression of sin2 π? This depends on the rules for
construction of this expression; there is no book to consult because the rules for symbolic
expressions in the mathematical register are not written down anywhere, except possible in
the bowels of Mathematica R (see Remark 1 under symbolic language). One could imagine
a rule that constructs the function sin2 from sin and notation for the squaring function, in
which case sin π is not a subexpression of sin2 π. On the other hand, one could imagine a
system in which one constructs (sin π)2 and than a Chomsky-style transformation converts
it to sin2 π. In that case sin π is in some sense a subexpression of sin2 π.
This example shows that determining subexpressions from the typographical
arrangement is not a trivial task. One must understand the rules for forming expressions,
implicitly if not explicitly.

431

contents

wordlist

Example 4 The set

index

{f | f = sinn , n ∈ N, n > 0}

could also be written
{f | f is a positive integral power of the sine function}
showing that English phrases can occur embedded in symbolic expressions. Citations
needed.
References Symbols and symbolic expressions are discussed in the context of
mathematical education in [Schoenfeld, 1985] , [Harel and Kaput, 1992] , [Tall, 1992c] .

432

contents

wordlist

index

symbolic language The symbolic language of mathematics is a distinct part of the

mathematical register. It consists of symbolic expressions written in the way
mathematicians traditionally write them. They may stand as complete sentences or may
be incorporated into statements in English. Occasionally statements in English are
embedded in symbolic expressions. (See Remark 2 under identiﬁer.)
Example 1 “π > 0.” is a complete assertion (formula) in the symbolic language of
mathematics.
Example 2 “If x is any number, then x2 ≥ 0.” is an assertion in the mathematical
register containing two symbolic expressions. Note that “x” is a term and “x2 ≥ 0” is a
symbolic assertion incorporated into the larger assertion in English. See parenthetic
assertion.
Example 3
“{n | n is even}.”
This is a term containing an embedded phrase in the mathematical register.
Remark 1 The symbolic language of mathematics has never been given by a
mathematical deﬁnition (in other words it is not a formal language). There would be
diﬃculties in doing so.
In the ﬁrst place, the symbolic language is context-dependent (examples are given
under that heading). Also, the symbolic language of mathematics has many variants
depending on the ﬁeld and individual idiosyncrasies. Finally, even if one gives a formal
deﬁnition one would have problems with mechanical parsing because the language
contains ambiguities. For example, is “ma” a symbol or is it m times a?
Mathematica R 3.0 has a standardized version (StandardForm) of the symbolic
expression language of the mathematical vernacular that eliminates ambiguities, and it
can also output symbolic expressions in a form called TraditionalForm that is rather
close to actual usage. (See [Wolfram, 1997] , pages 187ﬀ.) Presumably the implementation
of TraditionalForm would have involved a deﬁnition of it as a formal language.
De Bruijn [1994] proposes modeling a large part of the mathematical vernacular (not
just the symbolic language) using a programming language.

433

contents

wordlist

symbolic logic Another name for mathematical logic.

434

index

contents

wordlist

index

symbolitis The excessive use of symbols (as opposed to English words and phrases) in
mathematical writing – the meaning of “excessive”, of course, depends on the speaker!
There seems to be more objection to symbols from mathematical logic such as ∀ and ∃
than to others.

References [Gillman, 1987] , page 7.

435

contents

wordlist

index

symbol manipulation Symbol manipulation is the transformation of a symbolic

expression by using algebraic or syntactic rules, typically with the intention of producing a
more satisfactory expression. Symbol manipulation may be performed as a step in a proof
or as part of the process of solving a problem.
Example 1 The proof that a2 − b2 = (a + b)(a − b) based on the distributive law, the
commutative law for multiplication, and the algebraic laws concerning additive inverses:
(a + b)(a − b) = a(a − b) + b(a − b) = a2 − ab + ba − b2 = a2 − ab + ab − b2 = a2 − b2

An example of a proof by symbolic manipulation of formulas in mathematical logic is
given under conceptual. Proof by symbol manipulation is contrasted with conceptual
proof. See also aha.
Diﬃculties Students often manipulate symbols inappropriately, using rules not valid for
the objects being manipulated. This is discussed by Harel [1998] .

436

contents

wordlist

index

synecdoche Synecdoche is naming something by naming a part of it.
Example 1 Referring to a car as “wheels”.
Example 2 Naming a mathematical structure by its underlying set. This happens
very commonly. This is also a case of suppression of parameters. Citations needed.
Example 3 Naming an equivalence class by a member of the class. Note that this is
not an example of suppression of parameters. See well-deﬁned. Citations needed.
See also metaphor.
References [Presmeg, 1997b] .

437

contents

wordlist

index

syntax The syntax of an expression is an analysis of the manner in which the expression

has been constructed from its parts.
Example 1 The syntax of the expression 5 + 3 consists partly of the fact that “5” is
placed before “+” and “3” after it, but the syntax is more than that; it also includes the
fact that “+” is a binary operation written in inﬁx notation, so that the expression 5 + 3
is a term and not an assertion. The expression 3 + 5 is a diﬀerent expression; the
semantics usually used for this expression tells us that it has the same value as 5 + 3.
Example 2 The syntax of the expression 5 > 3 tells us that it is an assertion; the
semantics tells us that it is a true assertion.
Example 3 The syntax of the expression 3x + y is diﬀerent from the syntax of
3(x + y). In the common tree notation for syntax the two expressions are parsed as follows:

3

+S
ÙÙ SSS
Ù
SS
ÙÙ
ÙÙ
y
∗S
 SSS
SS

S


3

∗S
 SSS
SS



x

x

3x + y

+S
ÙÙ SSS
Ù
SS
ÙÙ
ÙÙ

(4)
y

3(x + y)

Remark 1 The syntax of an expression gives it structure beyond being merely a
string of symbols. The structure must be deduced by the reader with clues given by
convention (in the case of Example 3, that multiplication dominates addition),
parentheses, and the context. (See also Example 3 under symbolic expression.)
Successful students generally learn to deduce this structure without much explicit
instruction, and in many cases without much conscious awareness of the process. For
example, college students may be able to calculate 3(x + y) and 3x + y correctly for given
instantiations of x and y, but they may have never consciously noticed that in calculating
3x + y you must calculate the product before the sum, and the other way around for
3(x + y). (A reverse Polish calculator forces you to notice things like that.) See also
compositional.
438

contents

wordlist

index

The way the order of calculation is determined by the syntactic structure and the
observation in Remark 1 under semantics that substitution commutes with evaluation are
basic aspects of learning to deal with mathematical expressions that are essentially never
made explicit in teaching. (No teacher under whom I studied ever made them explicit.)
Diﬃculties Students vary widely on how much they are able to use the syntax to decode
mathematical expressions. A student may be able to understand a very complicated
statement that is in context, but will ﬁnd meaningless a statement with the same logical
structure about abstract objects. Note Example 3 under coreference.
More references to the literature are needed on this subject. References needed.
See also compositional, substitute.
Acknowledgments Some of this discussion was suggested by [Dubinsky, 1997] . A good
reference to the syntax of English is [McCawley, 1988a] , [McCawley, 1988b] . Thanks
also to Atish Bagchi.

439

contents

wordlist

synthetic See compositional.

440

index

contents

wordlist

index

term A term is a symbolic expression that denotes a (possibly variable) mathematical

object. This is in contrast to a symbolic assertion.
Example 1 Any symbol that denotes a (possibly variable) mathematical object is a
term. Thus π and 3 are terms.
Example 2 The expression 2 + 5 is a term that denotes 7.
Example 3 The expression x + 2y is a term. It denotes a variable number. If speciﬁc
numbers are substituted for x and y the resulting expression is a term that (in the usual
extensional semantics) denotes a speciﬁc number.
Example 4 The expression
2

1

x dx

is a term; it (extensionally) denotes the number 3/2.
Remark 1 “Term” is used in mathematical logic with this meaning. Some
mathematicians use “term” to denote a constituent of a sum, in a way analogous to the
use of factors for products. However, in this text we follow the usage in logic; in particular
a factor of a product is an example of a term (and so is the product). Citations needed.
Acknowledgments Owen Thomas.

441

contents

wordlist

TFAE Abbreviation for “the following are equivalent”.

442

index

contents

wordlist

index

that is Used to indicate that what follows is equivalent to what precedes, usually when
the equivalence is essentially a rewording. Citation: (Kra95.40).

443

contents

wordlist

the See deﬁnite article.

444

index

contents

wordlist

the following are equivalent See following are equivalent.

445

index

contents

wordlist

index

then The word then in the mathematical register generally means that what follows can
be deduced from the preceding assumption, which is commonly signaled by if or when.
See imply.
Example 1
“If n is divisible by 4, then n is even.”
Remark 1 Occasionally “then” has a temporal meaning.
Citations (Bar96.631), (Bur94.24).

446

contents

wordlist

index

theorem To call an assertion a theorem is to claim that the assertion has been proved.
Remark 1 In texts the proof is often given after the theorem has been stated. In that
case (assuming the proof is correct) it is still true that the theorem “has been proved”!
Some authors refer only to assertions they regard as important as theorems, and use
the word proposition for less important ones. See also lemma and corollary.
Theorems, along with deﬁnitions, are often delineated. See labeled style.

447

contents

wordlist

index

thus Thus means that what follows is a consequence of (or is equivalent to) what precedes.
Citations (KolBusRos96.109), (Mac71.58).

448

contents

wordlist

index

tilde The symbol “˜” over a letter is pronounced “tilde” (till-day or till-duh). Thus “˜” is
x
pronounced “x tilde”. Also called “twiddle” or “squiggle”.
This symbol is also used in web addresses, and I have heard it called “squiggle” in
that case as well.

449

contents

wordlist

index

translation problem The translation problem is the name used in this Handbook for the

process of discovering the logical structure of a mathematical assertion P that has been
stated in the mathematical register. This is essentially equivalent to the problem of ﬁnding
a statement in mathematical logic that represents P . Learning how to do this is one of the
diﬃcult skills students of mathematics have to acquire, even very early with simple word
problems. Many of the entries in this Handbook illustrate the complications this involves;
see for example conditional assertion and universal quantiﬁer – only two of many.
As far as I know, there are no extended or theory-based treatments of the translation
problem, although many entries in this Handbook refer to discussions in the literature
about particular cases of the problem. The text [Kamp and Reyle, 1993] is essentially a
study of the analogous problem of discovering the logical structure of statements in
ordinary English rather than in the mathematical register. The relationship between the
English and the logic is quite complex. See the discussion under and, for example.

450

contents

wordlist

index

trigonometric functions It is not always explicitly noted to students that if you write

sin x meaning the sine of x degrees, you are not using the same function as when you write
sin x, meaning the sine of x radians. They have diﬀerent derivatives, for example. The
same remark may be made of the other trigonometric functions.
Remark 1 This point is correctly made in [Edwards and Penney, 1998] , page 167.
Remark 2 It appears to me that in postcalculus pure mathematics “sin x” nearly
always refers to the sine of x radians (not degrees), often without explicitly noting the
fact. This is certainly not true for texts written by nonmathematicians, but the situation
is made easier by the customary use of the degree symbol when degrees are intended.
See also logarithm and global parameters.

Acknowledgments Michael Barr.

451

contents

wordlist

index

trivial
(a) About propositions A fact is said to be trivial to prove if the fact follows by rewriting
using deﬁnitions, or perhaps if the common mental representation of the mathematical
objects involved in the fact makes the truth of the fact immediately perceivable. (This
needs further analysis. I would tend to use obvious for the second meaning.)
Example 1 A textbook may deﬁne the image of a function F : A → B to be the set
of all elements of B of the form F (a) for some a ∈ A. It then goes on to say that F is
surjective if for every element b of B there is an element a ∈ A with the property that
F (a) = b. It may then state a theorem, or given an exercise, that says that a function
F : A → B is surjective if and only if the image of F is B. The proof follows immediately
by rewriting using deﬁnitions. I have known instructors to refer to such an assertion as
“trivial” and to question the worth of including it in the text. In contrast, I have known
many students in discrete math and abstract algebra classes who were totally baﬄed
when asked to prove such an assertion. This disparity between the students’ and the
instructors’ perception of what is “trivial” must be taken seriously.
Remark 1 I suspect that teachers (and hotshot math majors) telling students that
an assertion is “obvious” or “trivial” is an important cause (but not the only one) of the
feeling much of the American population has that they are “bad at math”. In many cases
a person who feels that way may have simply not learned to rewrite using deﬁnitions, and
so ﬁnds many proofs impossibly diﬃcult that their instructor calls “trivial”.
Remark 2 The teacher’s feeling that an assertion is obvious may also come from the
ratchet eﬀect.
References [Solow, 1995] is one text with a discussion of image and surjective as described
in Example 1.
Citations needed.
(b) About mathematical objects A function may be called trivial if it is the identity
function or a constant function, and possibly in other circumstances. Citations needed.
A solution to an equation is said to be trivial if it is the identity element for some
operation involved in the equation. There may be other situations in which a solution is
452

contents

wordlist

index

called “trivial” as well.
Citations (Len92.216), (Rib95.391).
A mathematical structure is said to be trivial if its underlying set is empty or a
singleton set. In particular, a subset of a set is nontrivial if it is nonempty. See proper.
Citations needed.
Citation (Bri77.189).
Remark 3 “Trivial” and degenerate overlap in meaning but are not interchangeable.
A citation search might be desirable, but it is not clear to me that there is a consistent
meaning to either word.

453

contents

wordlist

index

turf If you are defensive about negative comments about your ﬁeld, or annoyed when

another department tries to teach a course you believe belongs in mathematics, you are
protecting your turf. The use of this word of course is not restricted to mathematicians
(nor is the phenomenon it describes).
Example 1 I have occasionally witnessed irritation by people familiar with one ﬁeld
at the use of a term in that ﬁeld by people in a diﬀerent ﬁeld with a diﬀerent meaning.
This happened on the mathedu mailing list when some subscribers started talking about
constructivism with the meaning it has in mathematical education rather than the
(unrelated) meaning it has in mathematical logic.

454

contents

wordlist

twiddle See tilde.

455

index

contents

wordlist

index

type The type of a symbol is the kind of value it is allowed to have in the current context.
Example 1 In the assertion
“If f is diﬀerentiable and f (x) = 0 then x is a critical point of f .”
we may deduce that f is of type “function” and x is (probably) of type “real”, even if the
author does not say this. This sort of type deduction requires both mathematical
knowledge and knowledge of conventions; in the present example one convention is that
complex numbers are more commonly written z instead of x. Mathematical knowledge (as
well as convention) tells us that x cannot be of type integer.
Remark 1 One could dispense with the concept of type and refer to the set of
possible values of the symbol. It appears to me however that “type” is psychologically
diﬀerent from “set”. Normally one expects the type to be a natural and homogeneous
kind such as “function” or “real number”, not an arbitrary kind such as “real number
bigger than 3 or integer divisible by 4”. One has no such psychological constraint on sets
themselves. This needs further investigation.
Remark 2 Mathematicians do not use the word “type” much. Students commonly
make type mistakes (talking about 2π being divisible by 2, for example); it would be
helpful to refer to the concept explicitly as a way of raising consciousness. This is
discussed in [Wells, 1995] .

456

contents

wordlist

index

type labeling Giving the type of a symbol along with the symbol.
Example 1 If it has been established on some early page of a text that S3 denotes
the symmetric group on 3 letters. A later reference to it as “the group S3 ” or “the
symmetric group S3 ” is an example of type labeling.
Remark 1 Russian mathematical authors seem to do this a lot, although that may
be because one cannot attach grammatical endings to symbols.
References Jeﬀrey Ullman, in a guest appearance in [Knuth, Larrabee and Roberts, 1989]
, ﬂatly recommends always giving the type of a symbol. Using explicit typing in teaching
is advocated in [Wells, 1995] . See also [Bagchi and Wells, 1998a] .

457

contents

wordlist

index

under Used to name the function by which one has computed the value, or the function
being used as an operation.
Example 1 “If the value of x under F is greater than the value of x under G for
every x, one says that F > G.”
Citation (Fra82.41).
Example 2 “The set Z of integers is a group under addition.”
Citation (BriPre92.146), (Max93.27).
Example 3 “If x is related to y under E, we write xEy.”
Citation (Exn96.35).

458

contents

wordlist

index

unique To say that an object satisfying certain conditions is unique means that there is

only one object satisfying those conditions.
Citation (Bri93.782), (Str93.17) (where the unique object is variable, dependent on a
parameter).
Remark 1 This meaning can have philosophical complications; for example, some
mathematicians would say that by “the set of natural numbers” they mean any of the
models of the Peano axioms, all of which are isomorphic. Such mathematicians would say
that the natural numbers are “unique up to isomorphism”. Others would simply assert
that there is a unique set of natural numbers. Nevertheless, most mathematicians in
ordinary discourse speak of the natural numbers as if they were unique, whatever they
believe.
Note that “the symmetric group on n letters” is unique up to isomorphism, but in
contrast to the Peano natural numbers, it is not unique up to a unique isomorphism.
The word “unique” is misused by students; see in your own words. See also up to.

459

contents

wordlist

index

universal generalization If you have proved P (c) for a variable object c of some type,
and during the proof have made no restrictions on c, then you are entitled to conclude
that P (x) is true for all x of the appropriate type. This process is formalized in
mathematical logic as the rule of deduction called universal generalization.

460

contents

wordlist

index

universal instantiation If it is known that P (x) is true of all x of the appropriate type,

and c is the identiﬁer of a speciﬁc mathematical object of that type, then you are entitled
to conclude that P (c) is true. In mathematical logic, the formal version of this is known as
universal instantiation.

461

contents

wordlist

index

universal quantiﬁer An expression in mathematical logic of the form ∀x P (x), where P

is a predicate, means that P (x) is true for every x of the appropriate type. The symbol ∀
is pronounced “for all” and is called the universal quantiﬁer.

Expressing universal quantiﬁcation in the mathematical register When a universally
quantiﬁed sentence in the mathematical register is translated into a sentence of the form
∀x P (x) in mathematical logic, the assertion P (x) is nearly always in the form of a
conditional assertion. Thus in particular all the sentences listed as examples under
conditional assertion provide ways of expressing universal quantiﬁcation in English.
However, there are many other ways of doing that that are not conditional assertions in
English. To provide examples, let C(f ) mean that f is continuous and and D(f ) mean
that f is diﬀerentiable. The assertion ∀n (D(n) ⇒ C(n)) can be said in the following ways:
a) Every diﬀerentiable function is continuous. Citation: (Bar96.631),
(MorShaVal93.751).
b) Any diﬀerentiable function is continuous. Citation: (EdgUllWes97.574), (Niv56.83).
c) All diﬀerentiable functions are continuous. Citation: (AldDia86.333), (Ost71.624).
d) Diﬀerentiable functions are continuous. Citation: (Kau74.429).
e) A diﬀerentiable function is continuous. Citation: (BalYou77.451), (MacBir93.43).
f) Each diﬀerentiable function is continuous. Citation: (Bry93.30).
g) The multiples of 4 are even. I changed this example because to me “The
diﬀerentiable functions are continuous” sounds odd. In any case, I don’t have a
citation for this. Citations needed.
One can make the assertion an explicit conditional one using the same words:
h) For every function f , if f is diﬀerentiable then it is continuous. Citation:
(BhaSer97.502), (VanLutPrz77.435).
i) For any function f , if f is diﬀerentiable then it is continuous. Citation: (Bry93.62),
(Bla79.122).
j) For all functions f , if f is diﬀerentiable then it is continuous. Citation:
(Cho99.444), (Pow96.879).
In any of these sentences, the “for all” phrase may come after the main clause.
The conditional assertion can be varied in the ways described under that listing. See
462

contents

wordlist

index

also each.
If the variable is typed, either the deﬁnite or the indeﬁnite article may be used:
k) “If the function f is diﬀerentiable, then it is continuous.”
l) “If a function f is . . . ”. Citation: (RabGil93.168).
Remark 1 Sentences such as (d), (e) and (g) are often not recognized by students as
having universal quantiﬁcation force. Sentence (e) is discussed further under indeﬁnite
article, and sentence (f) is discussed further under each.
See also always, distributive plural and negation.
Universal quantiﬁcation in the symbolic language The quantiﬁer is sometimes
expressed by parentheses in displayed symbolic assertions. The assertion, “The square of
any real number is nonnegative” can be written this way:
x2 ≥ 0

(all real x)

or less explicitly
x2 ≥ 0
(x)
Open sentences Sometimes, the quantiﬁer is not reﬂected by any symbol or English
word. The sentence is then an open sentence and is interpreted as universally quantiﬁed.
The clue that this is the case is that the variables involved have not in the present context
been given speciﬁc values. Thus in (GraTre96.105):
“A function f of arity 2 is commutative if f (x, y) = f (y, x).”
This means that f (x, y) = f (y, x) for all x and all y.
Remark 2 Sometimes an author does not make it clear which variable is being
quantiﬁed.
“ In fact, every Qi (s) ∼ 1 (mod m), since. . . . ”
=
The context shows that this means
∀i Qi (s) ∼ 1 (mod m)
=
(This is from [Neidinger and Annen III, 1996] , page 646.)

463

contents

wordlist

index

References [Epp, 1999a] , [Wood and Perrett, 1997] , page 12 (written for students). For
studies of quantiﬁcation in English, see [Chierchia and McConnell-Ginet, 1990] and
[Keenan and Westerst˚ 1997] .
ahl,
See also always, never, existential quantiﬁer and order of quantiﬁers.

464

contents

wordlist

index

unnecessarily weak assertion Students are often uncomfortable when faced with an

assertion such as
“ Either x > 0 or x < 2 ”
because one could obviously make a stronger statement. The statement is nevertheless
true.
Example 1 Students have problems both with “2 ≤ 2” and with “2 ≤ 3”. This may
be compounded by problems with inclusive and exclusive or.
Remark 1 It appears to me that unnecessarily weak statements occur primarily in
these contexts:
a) When the statement is what follows formally from the preceding argument.
b) When the statement is made in that form because it allows one to deduce a desired
result.
I believe students are uncomfortable primarily in the case of (b), and that their
discomfort is an instance of walking blindfolded. Information needed.

Acknowledgments Michael Barr.

465

contents

wordlist

index

unwind A typical deﬁnition in mathematics may make use of a number of previously

deﬁned concepts. To unwind such a deﬁnition is to replace the deﬁned terms with explicit,
spelled-out requirements. This may change a conceptual deﬁnition into an elementary
deﬁnition. An example is given under elementary. See rewrite using deﬁnitions.

466

contents

wordlist

index

up to Let E be an equivalence relation. To say that a deﬁnition or description of a type

of mathematical object determines the object up to E means that any two objects
satisfying the description are equivalent with respect to E.
Example 1 An indeﬁnite integral f (x) dx is determined up to a constant. In this
case the equivalence relation is that of diﬀering by a constant.
The objects are often described in terms of parameters, in which case any two objects
satisfying the description are equivalent once the parameters are instantiated.
Example 2 The statement “G is a ﬁnite group of order n containing an element of
order n” forces G to be the cyclic group of order n, so that the statement deﬁnes G up to
isomorphism once n is instantiated.
See copy.
Citation (Fri95.29), (MacBir93.182).

467

contents

wordlist

uppercase See case.

468

index

contents

wordlist

index

vacuous implication A conditional assertion “If A then B” is true if A happens to be
false. This is not usually the interesting case and so this phenomenon is called vacuous
implication.

Diﬃculties Students have a tendency to forget about it even if reminded of it. For
example, if I note that the less-than relation on the set of all reals is antisymmetric, a
student will often ask, “How can less-than be antisymmetric? It’s impossible to have r < s
and s < r!”

469

contents

wordlist

index

vanish A function f vanishes at a point a if f (a) = 0.
Example 1 “Consider the collection of all continuous functions that vanish at 0.”
Citations (BouGriKac62.717), (New67.912).

470

contents

wordlist

index

variable A variate symbol.
Example 1 In the expression
“ Let f be a function for which f (x) > 0 for x > 2. ”
the x and the f are both variate symbols.
Remark 1 In common mathematical parlance only x in the preceding expression
would be called a variable. In the terminology of mathematical logic, both x and f are
variables.
See bound variable, free variable and the discussion after Example 2 under variable
mathematical object.

471

contents

wordlist

variable clash A substitution of an expression containing a free variable into an

index

expression that contains and binds the same literal variable.
9
Example 1 A student must solve an integral 0 r3 A dr, where she knows that A is
9
the area of a certain circle. She therefore rewrites it as 0 r3 πr2 dr; this will give the
wrong answer.

472

contents

wordlist

index

variate A free identiﬁer, either in the symbolic language or in English, is variate if it is

intended to refer to a variable mathematical object. A variate identiﬁer, at least in intent,
has more than one interpretation in the universe of discourse. These two points of view —
the identiﬁer names a variable mathematical object and the identiﬁer has more than one
interpretation — are discussed at length in section (b) under mathematical object.
Example 1 In the assertion, “If the quantity a is positive, then ax is positive for all
real x”, x and a are both variate. In contrast, in the phrase “the exponential function ax ”,
a is variate but x is not an identiﬁer, it is a dummy variable. In this case, in common
usage, x is a variable and a is a parameter.
Example 2 In the passage
“Let G be a group with identity element e.”
“G” and “e” are variate.
Example 3 “Let G be a group and g ∈ G. Suppose the group G is commutative
. . . .” This illustrates the fact that variable mathematical structures are commonly
referred to using deﬁnite noun phrases.
Remark 1 Being determinate or variate is a matter of the current interpretation; it
is not an inherent property of the symbol, even though some symbols such as π are
conventionally determinate and others such as x are conventionally variate. For example,
π is sometimes used as the name of a projection function.
Remark 2 The distinction between determinate and variate is not the same as the
grammatical distinction between deﬁnite description and indeﬁnite description. See
Example 1 under deﬁnite description.
Remark 3 The distinction between determinate and variate is not the same as the
grammatical distinction between common and proper nouns. Indeed, all symbolic
expressions seem to use syntax very similar to that of proper nouns. See Remark 2 under
symbol.
Remark 4 Note that variate and determinate identiﬁers are free by deﬁnition.
Asking whether a bound variable is variate or determinate does not in any obvious way
make sense. See Remark 2 under bound identiﬁer.

473

contents

wordlist

index

Remark 5 In the passage
“Suppose x is a real variable and 3x + 1 = 7.”
Then one deduces that x = 2. Its use in that sentence is nevertheless variate. The intent
is that it be a variable. The conditions imposed force it to denote just one number. (It is
easy to think of examples where, unlike this one, it is very diﬃcult to determine whether
the conditions force a unique value.) It is the intent that matters.
Remark 6 Apparently [ISO, 1982] , quoted in [Beccari, 1997] , recommends a
practice which in my terminology would be: Use upright typographic characters for
determinate symbols and slanted typographical characters for variate symbols. This
recommendation was carried out in two research papers I participated in [Bagchi and
Wells, 1997a] , [Bagchi and Wells, 1997b] . I have not seen [ISO, 1982] .
Terminology The names “determinate” and “variate” are my own coinages. I felt it
important not to use the phrase “variable identiﬁer” because it is ambiguous.
Acknowledgments Owen Thomas.

474

contents

wordlist

index

verify To verify an assertion is to check that the statement holds for all possible

instantiations of the variables in the assertion. The word “verify” is used particularly
when this check is performed by considering the possibilities case by case.
Example 1 One might prove an assertion about all ﬁnite simple groups by checking
each family of ﬁnite simple groups and each sporadic one separately.
Mathematicians tend to ﬁnd such proofs unsatisfying.

References I got this idea from [Rota, 1996] , page 136.
Remark 1 It is my impression that scientists sometimes say an equation is “veriﬁed”
if it is true for some example instantiations; no claim is made that all cases have been
veriﬁed. I do not have a citation for this. Citations needed.

475

contents

wordlist

vinculum See bar.

476

index

contents

wordlist

index

Vulcanism This is the theory, espoused, usually subconsciously, by many mathematicians
and logicians, that the English language should be forced to mirror the notation, syntax
and rules of one or another of the common forms of mathematical logic. This is a special
kind of prescriptivism.
Example 1 The statement “All that glitters is not gold”, translated into logical
notation the way the syntax indicates, gives
∀x(glitters(x) ⇒ (not gold(x)))
However, its meaning is
not ∀x(glitters(x) ⇒ gold(x))
The “not” modiﬁes the whole sentence, not the phrase “is gold”. Many, including perhaps
most mathematicians, would regard this sentence as “wrong” in spite of the fact that
native English speakers use sentences like it all the time and rarely misunderstand them.
Another example is given under order of quantiﬁers.
Remark 1 Vulcanism has succeeded in ruling out the use of double negatives in
educated discourse in English, but not in colloquial use in some dialects. See [Huddleston
and Pullum, 2002] , Chapter 9. It has not succeeded in ruling out the phenomenon
described in Example 1.
Remark 2 Natural language has been around for thousands of years and has evolved
into a wonderfully subtle tool for communication. First order logic is about a century old
(although it has older precursors dating back to Aristotle) and represents an artiﬁcial
form of reasoning suited to mathematics, but to little else. There is more about the
suitability of mathematical logic in Remark 2 under mathematical logic, in subsection (c)
of mathematical object and under only if.
Remark 3 The name is my own.

477

contents

wordlist

index

Vulcanize To Vulcanize an English sentence in the mathematical register is to restate it

in a form that can be mindlessly translated into one of the usual forms of symbolic logic in
a way that retains the intended meaning.
Example 1 “Every element has an inverse” could be Vulcanized into “For each
element x there is an element y that is inverse to x”, which translates more or less directly
into ∀x∃y (Inverse(y, x)).
Remark 1 A style manual for mathematical writing should address the issue of how
much Vulcanizing is appropriate. Thus the Vulcanizing in Example 1 is surely
unnecessary, but one should avoid saying “There is an inverse for every element”, which
reverses the quantiﬁers. (See Example 1 under order of quantiﬁers.)
See also fundamentalist.

478

contents

wordlist

index

walking blindfolded Sometimes a lecturer lists steps in an argument that will indeed

culminate in a valid proof, but the reason for the steps is not apparent to the student.
The student may feel like someone who is walking straight ahead with a blindfold on: how
do you know you won’t bump into a wall or fall oﬀ a cliﬀ? That is walking blindfolded
(my name). This is closely related to the attitude described in section (a) under attitudes.
It is my observation that many students ﬁnd it diﬃcult or impossible to follow a
proof when they cannot see where it is going.
See also look ahead.

479

contents

wordlist

index

well-deﬁned Suppose you try to deﬁne a function F on a partition Π of a set A by

specifying its value on a class C of Π in terms of an element x ∈ C (a case of synecdoche).
For this to work, one must have F (x) = F (x ) whenever x is equivalent to x . In that case
the function F is said to be well-deﬁned. (Of course, it is not deﬁned at all if it is not
well-deﬁned!).
Example 1 Let Z2 be the group of congruence class of integers mod 2, with the class
of n denoted [n]. Deﬁne F : Z2 → Z2 by F [n] = [n2 ]. Then F is well-deﬁned (in fact, it is
the identity function), because an integer is even if and only if its square is even. If you
say G[n] = the number of primes dividing n, then G would not be well-deﬁned, since
G[2] = [1], G[6] = [2], and [2] = [6] but [1] = [2].
Deﬁnition on equivalence classes is perhaps the most common use of “well-deﬁned”,
but there are other situations in which it is used as well.
Example 2 Let P denote the set of all nonempty subsets of the set of nonnegative
integers. Deﬁne F : P → Z by: F (A) is the smallest element of A. Since the nonnegative
integers are well-ordered, F is well-deﬁned. This is a case where there might have been
doubt that the object exists, rather than worry about whether it is ambiguous.
Example 3 Conway deﬁned a sequence on the positive integers by a(1) = a(2) = 1
and
a(n) = a(a(n − 1)) + a(n − a(n − 1))
for n ≥ 3. This is well-deﬁned because one can show by induction that a(n) < n for n ≥ 3
(otherwise the term a(n − a(n − 1)) could cause trouble). This example comes from
[Mallows, 1991] .
See radial concept and fundamentalist.

Variations Many authors omit the hyphen in “well-deﬁned”.
Remark 1 There is a subtlety in Example 3. The observation that a(n) < n for
n ≥ 3 does indeed show that the sequence is well-deﬁned, but a sequence can sometimes
be well-deﬁned even if the function calls in the deﬁnition of the value at n refer to larger

480

contents

wordlist

integers than n. An example is the function

F F (n + 11)
F (n) =
n − 10
Citations needed.

481

index

(n ≤ 100)
(n > 100)

contents

wordlist

index

when Often used to mean “if”.
Example 1
“When a function has a derivative, it is necessarily continuous.”
Remark 1 Modern dictionaries [Neufeldt, 1988] record this meaning of “when”, but
the original Oxford English Dictionary does not.
One occasionally comes across elaborations of this usage, such as “when and only
when”, “exactly when”, “precisely when” and so on, all apparently meaning “if and only
if”.
The usage “if whenever” evidently is motivated by the desire to avoid two if’s in a
row, for example in the sentence, “A relation α is symmetric if whenever xαy then yαx”.
References This discussion follows [Bagchi and Wells, 1998a] .

482

contents

wordlist

index

where Where is used in two special ways in the mathematical register.
(a) To state a postcondition
Example 1 “ Deﬁnition An element a of a group is involutive if a2 = e, where e is
the identity element of the group.” Here the statement “where e is the identity element of
the group” is a postcondition.
Citations (Bar96.626), (Ros93.223).
Remark 1 [Krantz, 1997] , page 44 and [Steenrod et al., 1975] , page 38, both
deprecate this usage.
Acknowledgments Michael Barr for references.
(b) Used to introduce a constraint
Example 2 “A point x where f (x) = 0 is a critical point.” In contrast to the ﬁrst
usage, I have not found citations where this usage doesn’t carry a connotation of location.
Citation (Law96.243).

483

contents

wordlist

index

without loss of generality A proof of an assertion involving two elements x and y of

some mathematical structure S might ostensibly require consideration of two cases in
which x and y are related in diﬀerent ways to each other; for example for some predicate
P , P (x, y) or P (y, x) could hold. However, if there is a symmetry of S that interchanges x
and y, one may need to consider only one case. In that case, the proof may begin with a
remark such as,
“Without loss of generality, we may assume P (x, y).”
Citations needed.

484

contents

wordlist

index

witness If P (x) is a predicate with just the one variable x, a particular object c for which
P (c) is true is a witness to the fact that ∃xP (x) is true.

485

contents

wordlist

WLOG Without loss of generality.

486

index

contents

wordlist

index

yes it’s weird Students sometimes express discomfort at examples that seem arbitrary in

some sense.
Example 1 Try using the set {1, 3, 5, 6, 7, 9, 11} in an example; you may get some
question such as “Why did you put a 6 in there?”
Example 2 A diﬀerent sort of example is a heterogenous set such as the set
{3, {2, 3}, ∅}, which has both numbers and sets as elements.
Example 3 Thom [1992] objects to the use of or between adjectives when the
qualities are heterogenous. Thus for him “Find all the balls that are red or white” is
acceptable, but not “Find all the balls that are red or large”. He was discussing the use of
such examples with children in school. I have not had a student express discomfort or
confusion at such usage; this may be because they have been brainwashed/educated (take
your pick) by the American school system.
Remark 1 In teaching abstract mathematics I have adopted the practice of
explicitly recognizing the students’ discomfort in situations such as in Examples 1 and 2
(“yes, it’s weird”). I generally say something such as: allowing such constructions is
necessary to do abstract mathematics. As far as I can tell this satisﬁes nearly everyone. I
have no basis for doing this from the mathematical education literature, but it appears to
me that the discomfort is real and may very well contribute to the common attitude
expressed by the phrase “I don’t have a mathematical mind”.
When a teacher takes the point of view that the student should have known that such
arbitrary constructions were legitimate, or otherwise engages in put-down behavior, it can
only contribute to the student’s feeling of not being cut out for mathematics.
References needed.

487

contents

wordlist

index

you don’t know shriek This is the indignant shriek that begins, “You mean you don’t

know . . . !?” (Or “never heard of . . . ”) This is often directed at young college students
who may be very bright but who simply have not lived long enough to pick up all the
information a middle aged college professor has. I remember emitting this shriek when I
discovered as a young teacher that about half my freshman calculus students didn’t know
what a lathe is. In my ﬁfties the shriek was emitted at me when two of my colleagues
discovered that I had never heard of the prestigious private liberal arts college they sent
their oﬀspring to.
This phenomenon should be distinguished from the annoyance expressed at someone
who isn’t paying attention to what is happening or to what someone is saying.

Terminology The name is mine. However, this phenomenon needs a more insulting name
guaranteed to embarrass anyone who thinks of using it.

488

contents

wordlist

index

Z
(a) The letter The letter Z is pronounced “zee” in the USA and “zed” in the United
Kingdom and in much of the ex-British Empire.
Remark 1 The speciﬁcation language Z was invented in Britain. Some American
computer scientists call it “zed” as a result, although they say “zee” when referring to the
letter.
(b) The integers The symbol Z usually denotes the set of all integers. Some authors use I.
Citations (DavPri90.3).
Remark 2 Some authors strongly object to the use of the blackboard bold type style
exempliﬁed by R and Z.

489

contents

wordlist

zero See root.

490

index

contents

wordlist

index

Bibliography
Ad´mek, J. and J. Rosiˇky (1994), Locally Presentable and Accessible Categories. Cambridge
a
c
University Press. (283)
Asiala, M., A. Brown, D. J. DeVries, E. Dubinsky, D. Mathews, and K. Thomas (1996), ‘A
framework for research and curriculum development in undergraduate mathematics
education’. In [Kaput, Schoenfeld and Dubinsky, 1996] , pages 1–32. (37)
Azzouni, J. (1994), Metaphysical Myths, Mathematical Practice. Cambridge University Press.
(289)
Bagchi, A. and C. Wells (1997a), ‘Graph-based logic and sketches I: The general framework’.
Available by web browser from URL:
http://www.cwru.edu/artsci/math/wells/pub/papers.html. (301, 474)
Bagchi, A. and C. Wells (1997b), ‘Graph-based logic and sketches II: Equational logic’.
Available by web browser from URL:
http://www.cwru.edu/artsci/math/wells/pub/papers.html. (301, 474)
Bagchi, A. and C. Wells (1998a), ‘On the communication of mathematical reasoning’. PRIMUS,
volume 8, pages 15–27. Also available by web browser from URL:
http://www.cwru.edu/artsci/math/wells/pub/papers.html. (77, 88, 189, 230, 266, 301,
307, 307, 330, 457, 482)
Bagchi, A. and C. Wells (1998b), ‘Varieties of mathematical prose’. PRIMUS, volume 8, pages
116–136. Also available by web browser from URL:
http://www.cwru.edu/artsci/math/wells/pub/papers.html. (88, 166, 259, 291, 291, 309,
309, 364, 412, 557)
Barr, M. and C. Wells (1995), Category Theory for Computing Science, 2nd Edition.
Prentice-Hall International Series in Computer Science. Prentice-Hall International, New
York. (149)
Bartle, R. C. (1996), ‘Return to the Riemann integral’. American Mathematical Monthly,
volume 103, pages 625–632. (339, 339)
Beccari, C. (1997), ‘Typesetting mathematics for science and technology according to ISO
491

contents

wordlist

index

31/XI’. TUGboat, volume 18, pages 39–48. (227, 474)
Bellack, A. A. and H. M. Kliebard, editors (1977), Curriculum and Evaluation. McCutchan.
(501)
Benaceraﬀ, P. (1965), ‘What numbers could not be’. Philosophical Review, volume 74, pages
47–73. (205)
Brown, L. and A. Dobson (1996), ‘Using dissonance - ﬁnding the grit in the oyster’. In
[Claxton, 1996] , pages 212–227. (77)
Carkenord, D. and J. Bullington (1993), ‘Bringing cognitive dissonance to the classroom’.
Teaching of Psychology, volume 20, pages 41–43. (77)
Carlson, M. P. (1998), ‘A cross-sectional investigation of the development of the function
concept’. In [Schoenfeld, Kaput and Dubinsky, 1998] , pages 114–162. (37, 202)
Casacuberta, C. and M. Castellet, editors (1992), Mathematical Research Today and Tomorrow.
Springer-Verlag. (500)
Chierchia, G. (1995), Dynamics of Meaning. The University of Chicago Press. (112, 193)
Chierchia, G. and S. McConnell-Ginet (1990), Meaning and Grammar. The MIT Press. (59, 64,
95, 102, 169, 403, 416, 464)
Claxton, G., editor (1996), Liberating the Learner: Lessons for Professional Development in
Education. Routledge. (492)
Cornu, B. (1992), ‘Limits’. In [Tall, 1992a] , pages 153–166. (371)
Coulthard, M. (1994), Advances in Written Text Analysis. Routledge. (497)
Dahlberg, R. P. and D. L. Housman (1997), ‘Facilitating learning events through example
generation’. Educational Studies in Mathematics, volume 33(3), pages 283–299. (166)
de Bruijn, N. G. (1994), ‘The mathematical vernacular, a language for mathematics with typed
sets’. In Selected Papers on Automath, Nederpelt, R. P., J. H. Geuvers, and R. C. de Vrijer,
editors, volume 133 of Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics, pages 865 –
935. Elsevier. (102, 291, 291, 291, 429, 433)
Dennett, D. (1991), Consciousness Explained. Little, Brown and Company. (296)
DeVries, D. J. (1997), ‘RUMEC APOS theory glossary’. Available by web browser from
http://rumec.cs.gsu.edu/Papers/glossary.html. (37, 37)
Dieudonn´, J. A. (1992), Mathematics, the Music of Reason. Springer-Verlag. (296)
e
492

contents

wordlist

index

Dorf, R. C., editor (2000), The Engineering Handbook. CRC Press LLC. PDF ﬁles available at
http://www.engnetbase.com. (Bibliography)
Dreyfus, T. (1992), ‘Advanced mathematical thinking processes’. In [Tall, 1992a] , pages 25–41.
(17, 296, 320)
Dubinsky, E. (1997). ‘Putting constructivism to work: Bridging the gap between research and
collegiate teaching practice’. Talk given at the Research Conference in Collegiate
Mathematics Education, Central Michigan University, September 4–7, 1997. (331, 439)
Dubinsky, E. and G. Harel (1992), ‘The nature of the process conception of function’. In [Harel
and Dubinsky, 1992] , pages 85–106. (37, 202)
Dubinsky, E., A. Schoenfeld, and J. Kaput, editors (1994), Research in Collegiate Mathematics
Education. I, volume 4 of CBMS Issues in Mathematics Education. American Mathematical
Society. (500)
Dym, C. L. and E. S. Ivey (1980), Principles of Mathematical Modeling. Academic Press. (401)
Ebbinghaus, H.-D., J. Flum, and W. Thomas (1984), Mathematical Logic. Springer-Verlag. (148,
190, 284, 285, 401)
Edwards, C. H. and D. E. Penney (1998), Calculus with Analytic Geometry, Fifth Edition.
Prentice-Hall. (451)
Eisenberg, T. (1992), ‘Functions and associated learning diﬃculties’. In [Tall, 1992a] , pages
140–152. (202)
English, L. D. (1997), Mathematical Reasoning: Analogies, Metaphors and Images. Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates. Reviewed in [Dubinsky, 1999] . (300, 496, 498, 498, 500, 501)
Epp, S. S. (1995), Discrete Mathematics with Applications, 2nd Ed. Brooks/Cole. (95, 158, 370,
378)
Epp, S. S. (1999a), ‘The language of quantiﬁcation in mathematics instruction’. Preprint
available from Susanna S. Epp, Department of Mathematical Sciences, 2219 North Kenmore,
DePaul University, Chicago, IL 60614, USA, sepp@condor.depaul.edu. (291, 464)
Epp, S. S. (1999b), ‘A uniﬁed framework for proof and disproof’. To appear in The
Mathematics Teacher. (364)
Ernest, P. (1998), Social Constructivism as a Philosophy of Mathematics. State University of
New York Press. Reviewed in [Gold, 1999] . (100, 494)
Fauconnier, G. (1997), Mappings in Thought and Language. Cambridge University Press. (92,
493

contents

wordlist

index

93)
Fearnley-Sander, D. (1982), ‘Hermann Grassmann and the prehistory of universal algebra’.
American Mathematical Monthly, volume 89, pages 161–166. (429)
Festinger, L. (1957), A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance. Stanford University Press. (77, 77)
Fiengo, R. and R. May (1996), ‘Anaphora and identity’. In [Lappin, 1997] , pages 117–144.
(112)
Fletcher, P. and C. W. Patty (1988), Foundations of Higher Mathematics. PWS-Kent
Publishing Company. (179)
Fourman, M. (1977), ‘The logic of topoi’. In Handbook of Mathematical Logic, Barwise, J. et al.,
editors. North-Holland. (288)
Fourman, M. and S. Vickers (1986), ‘Theories as categories’. In Category Theory and Computer
Programming, Pitt, D. et al., editors, volume 240 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
pages 434–448. Springer-Verlag. (288)
Fraleigh, J. B. (1982), A First Course in Abstract Algebra. Addison-Wesley. (146)
Gil, D. (1992), ‘Scopal quantiﬁers; some universals of lexical eﬀability’. In [Kefer and van der
Auwera, 1992] , pages 303–345. (169)
Gillman, L. (1987), Writing Mathematics Well. Mathematical Association of America. (230,
241, 339, 435)
Gold, B. (1999), ‘Review’. American Mathematical Monthly, volume 106, pages 373–380.
Review of [Ernest, 1998] and [Hersh, 1997b] . (100, 493, 494)
Grassman, W. K. and J.-P. Tremblay (1996), Logic and Discrete Mathematics: A Computer
Science Perspective. Prentice-Hall. (188, 326, 378)
Gries, D. and F. B. Schneider (1993), A Logical Approach to Discrete Mathematics.
Springer-Verlag. (90, 158, 326, 407)
Grimaldi, R. P. (1999), Discrete and Combinatorial Mathematics, An Applied Introduction,
Fourth Edition. Addison-Wesley. (158)
Guenther, R. K. (1998), Human Cognition. Prentice Hall. (340)
Halliday, M. A. K. (1994), An Introduction to Functional Grammar, Second Edition. Edward
Arnold. (112, 193)
Halliday, M. A. K. and J. R. Martin (1993), Writing Science: Literacy and Discursive Power.
University of Pittsburgh Press. (87, 88, 383)
494

contents

wordlist

index

Hanna, G. (1992), ‘Mathematical proof’. In [Tall, 1992a] , pages 54–61. (364)
Harel, G. (1998), ‘Two dual assertions: The ﬁrst on learning and the second on teaching (or vice
versa)’. American Mathematical Monthly, volume , pages 497–507. (436)
Harel, G. and E. Dubinsky, editors (1992), The Concept of Function, volume 25 of MAA Notes.
Mathematical Association of America. (202, 493, 498, 499, 500)
Harel, G. and J. Kaput (1992), ‘Conceptual entities and symbols’. In [Tall, 1992a] , pages
82–94. (296, 429, 432)
Hersh, R. (1997a), ‘Math lingo vs. plain English: Double entendre’. American Mathematical
Monthly, volume 104, pages 48–51. (202, 241, 307, 327, 401)
Hersh, R. (1997b), What is Mathematics, Really? Oxford University Press. Reviewed in [Gold,
1999] . (37, 100, 289, 494)
Hershkowitz, R. (1983), Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference for the Psychology
of Mathematics Education. Wiezmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel. (498)
Herzog, G. (1998), ‘c1 solutions of x = f (x ) are convex or concave’. American Mathematical
Monthly, volume 105, pages 554–555. (365)
Higham, N. J. (1993), Handbook of Writing for the Mathematical Sciences. Society for
Industrial and Applied Mathematics. (230)
Hintikka, J. (1996), The principles of mathematics revisited. Cambridge University Press. (283)
Hofstadter, D. (1995), Fluid Concepts and Creative Analogies. BasicBooks. (28)
Huddleston, R. and G. K. Pullum (2002), The Cambridge Grammar of the English Language.
Cambridge University Press. (477)
ISO (1982), Mathematical Signs and Symbols for Use in Physical Sciences and Technology, 2nd
ed., ISO 31/11, volume N.2 of ISO Standards Handbook. International Standards
Organization. (227, 474, 474)
Jackendoﬀ, R., P. Bloom, and K. Wynn, editors (1999), Language, Logic and Concepts. The
MIT Press. (497, 498)
Janvier, C., editor (1987), Problems of Representation in the Teaching and Learning of
Mathematics. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc. (386)
Jensen, K. and N. Wirth (1985), Pascal User Manual and Report, 3rd ed. Springer-Verlag. (190)
Kamp, H. and U. Reyle (1993), From Discourse to Logic, Parts I and II. Studies in Linguistics
and Philosophy. Kluwer Academic Publishers. (31, 31, 78, 95, 112, 121, 136, 142, 169, 241,
495

contents

wordlist

index

242, 243, 416, 450)
Kaput, J., A. H. Schoenfeld, and E. Dubinsky, editors (1996), Research in Collegiate
Mathematics Education. II, volume 6 of CBMS Issues in Mathematics Education. American
Mathematical Society. (491)
Katz, A. N., C. Cacciari, R. W. Gibbs, Jr, and M. Turner (1998), Figurative Language and
Thought. Oxford University Press. (93)
Keenan, E. L. and D. Westerst˚ (1997), ‘Generalized quantiﬁers in linguistics and logic’. In
ahl
[van Benthem and ter Meulen, 1997] , pages 837–896. (464)
Kefer, M. and J. van der Auwera, editors (1992), Meaning and Grammar: Cross-Linguistic
Perspectives. Mouton de Gruyter. (494)
Kenschaft, P. C. (1997), Math Power: How to Help your Child Love Math, Even if You Don’t.
Addison-Wesley. (286, 320)
Kieran, C. (1990), ‘Cognitive processes involved in learning school algebra’. In [Nesher and
Kilpatrick, 1990] , pages 96–112. (296)
Knuth, D. E. (1986), The TeX Book. Addison-Wesley. (150, 216)
Knuth, D. E., T. Larrabee, and P. M. Roberts (1989), Mathematical Writing, volume 14 of
MAA Notes. Mathematical Association of America. (457)
Koenig, J.-P., editor (1998), Discourse and Cognition. CSLI Publications. (496)
Kohl, J. R. (1995), ‘An overview of English article usage for speakers of English as a second
language’. URL: http://phserver.rpi.edu/dept/llc/writecenter/web/text/esl.html.
(42)
Kolman, B., R. C. Busby, and S. Ross (1996), Discrete Mathematical Structures, 3rd Edition.
Prentice-Hall. (342)
Krantz, S. G. (1995), The Elements of Advanced Mathematics. CRC Press. (378)
Krantz, S. G. (1997), A Primer of Mathematical Writing. American Mathematical Society. (26,
132, 221, 230, 339, 366, 483)
Kunen, K. and J. E. Vaughan, editors (1984), Handbook of Set-Theoretic Topology. Elsevier.
(498)
Lakatos, I. (1976), Proofs and Refutations. Cambridge University Press. (296)
Lakoﬀ, G. (1986), Women, Fire, and Dangerous Things. The University of Chicago Press. (87,
92, 296, 296, 377, 556)
496

contents

wordlist

index

Lakoﬀ, G. and R. E. N´nez (1997), ‘The metaphorical structure of mathematics: Sketching out
u˜
cognitive foundations for a mind-based mathematics’. In [English, 1997] , pages 21–92.
Reviewed in [Dubinsky, 1999] . (93, 201, 205, 297, 298, 299, 384, 406, 555, 555)
Lakoﬀ, G. and R. E. N´nez (1998), ‘Conceptual metaphors in mathematics’. In [Koenig, 1998] ,
u˜
pages 219–238. (93, 298)
Lakoﬀ, G. and R. E. N´nez (2000), Where Mathematics Comes From. Basic Books. (67, 93,
u˜
244, 298, 298, 299, 299, 409)
Lambek, J. and P. Scott (1986), Introduction to Higher Order Categorical Logic, volume 7 of
Cambridge Studies in Advanced Mathematics. Cambridge University Press. (288)
Landau, S. I. (1989), Dictionaries: The Art and Craft of Lexicography. Cambridge University
Press. (9, 12)
Lanham, R. A. (1991), A Handlist of Rhetorical Terms. The University of California Press,
Second Edition. (153, 298)
Lappin, S. (1997), The Handbook of Contemporary Semantic Theory. Blackwell Publishers.
(493, 498)
Lawvere, F. W. and S. Schanuel (1997), Conceptual Mathematics : A First Introduction to
Categories. Cambridge University Press. (292)
Lewis, H. R. and C. H. Papadimitriou (1998), Elements of the Theory of Computation, 2nd
Edition. Prentice-Hall. (104, 205)
Lønning, J. T. (1997), ‘Plurals and collectivity’. In [van Benthem and ter Meulen, 1997] , pages
1009–1054. (78)
Mac Lane, S. and G. Birkhoﬀ (1993), Algebra, third edition. Chelsea. (24, 201, 201)
Makkai, M. (1999), ‘On structuralism in mathematics’. In [Jackendoﬀ, Bloom and Wynn, 1999]
, pages 43–66. (205)
Makkai, M. and R. Par´ (1990), Accessible Categories: the Foundations of Categorical Model
e
Theory, volume 104 of Contemporary Mathematics. American Mathematical Society. (283)
Makkai, M. and G. Reyes (1977), First Order Categorical Logic, volume 611 of Lecture Notes in
Mathematics. Springer-Verlag. (283, 288)
Mallows, C. L. (1991), ‘Conway’s challenge sequence’. American Mathematical Monthly, volume
98, pages 5–20. (480)
Maurer, S. B. (1991), ‘Advice for undergraduates on special aspetcs of writing mathematics’.
497

contents

wordlist

index

Primus, volume 1, pages 9–30. (408)
McCarthy, M. (1994), ‘It, this and that’. In [Coulthard, 1994] , pages 266–275. (112)
McCawley, J. D. (1988a), The Syntactic Phenomena of English, Vol. I. The University of
Chicago Press. (439)
McCawley, J. D. (1988b), The Syntactic Phenomena of English, Vol. II. The University of
Chicago Press. (439)
McCawley, J. D. (1993), Everything that Linguists have Always Wanted to Know about Logic but
were Ashamed to Ask. The University of Chicago Press. (95, 105, 322)
Meel, D. E. (1998), ‘Honors students’ calculus understandings: Comparing
Calculus&Mathematica and traditional calculus students’. In [Schoenfeld, Kaput and
Dubinsky, 1998] , pages 163–215. (296)
Mendelson, E. (1987), Introduction to Mathematical Logic. Wadsworth and Brooks/Cole. (285,
401)
Michener, E. (1978), ‘Understanding understanding mathematics’. Cognitive Science, volume 2,
pages 361–383. (166)
Muskens, R., J. van Benthem, and A. Visser (1997), ‘Dynamics’. In [van Benthem and ter
Meulen, 1997] , pages 587–648. (102)
Nardi, E. (1998), ‘The novice mathematician’s encounter with formal mathematical reasoning’.
Teaching and Learning Undergraduate Mathematics: Newsletter, volume 9. Available by web
browser from URL: http://w3.bham.ac.uk/ctimath/talum/newsletter/talum9.htm.
(364)
Neidinger, R. D. and R. J. Annen III (1996), ‘The road to chaos is ﬁlled with polynomial
curves’. American Mathematical Monthly, volume 103, pages 640–653. (339, 463)
Nesher, P. and J. Kilpatrick, editors (1990), Mathematics and Cognition. ICMI Study Series.
Cambridge University Press. (55, 496)
Neufeldt, V., editor (1988), Webster’s New World Dictionary, Third College Edition. Simon
and Schuster. (482)
Norman, A. (1992), ‘Teachers’ mathematical knowledge of the concept of function’. In [Harel
and Dubinsky, 1992] , pages 215–232. (200, 202)
Nyikos, P. (1984), ‘The theory of nonmetrizable manifolds’. In [Kunen and Vaughan, 1984] ,
pages 633–685. (216)
498

contents

wordlist

index

Olson, D. (1998). ‘When reversible steps aren’t elbisreveR’. Talk at Third Annual Conference
on Research in Undergraduate Mathematics Education, 19 September 1998, South Bend,
Indiana. (47, 274)
Partee, B. H. (1996), ‘Formal semantics in linguistics’. In [Lappin, 1997] , pages 11–38. (403)
Piere, S. E. B. and T. E. Kieren (1989), ‘A recursive theory of mathematical understanding’.
For the Learning of Mathematics, volume 9, pages 7–11. (37, 296)
Pimm, D. (1983), ‘Against generalization: Mathematics, students and ulterior motives’. In
[Hershkowitz, 1983] , pages 52–56. (206)
Pimm, D. (1987), Speaking Mathematically. Routledge and K. Paul. (289, 291, 401)
Pimm, D. (1988), ‘Mathematical metaphor’. For the Learning of Mathematics, volume , pages
30–34. (300)
Pinker, S. and A. Prince (1999), ‘The nature of human concepts: Evidence from an unusual
source’. In [Jackendoﬀ, Bloom and Wynn, 1999] , pages 221–262. (87, 87, 345)
Pomerance, C. (1996), ‘A tale of two sieves’. Notices of the American Mathematical Society,
volume 43, pages 1473–1485. (22)
Presmeg, N. C. (1997a), ‘Generalization using imagery in mathematics’. In [English, 1997] ,
pages 299–312. Reviewed in [Dubinsky, 1999] . (296)
Presmeg, N. C. (1997b), ‘Reasoning with metaphors and metonymies in mathematics learning’.
In [English, 1997] , pages 267–280. Reviewed in [Dubinsky, 1999] . (92, 437)
Raymond, E. (1991), The New Hacker’s Dictionary. Massachusetts Institute of Technology. (54,
255)
Resnick, L. B. (1987), Education and Learning to Think. National Academy Press. (400)
Resnick, L. B., E. Cauzinille-Marmeche, and J. Mathieu (1987), ‘Understanding algebra’. In
[Sloboda and Rogers, 1987] , pages 169–203. (175)
Richter, R. B. and W. P. Wardlaw (1990), ‘Diagonalization over commutative rings’. American
Mathematical Monthly, volume 97, pages 223–227. (165)
Rosen, K. (1991), Discrete Mathematics and its Applications, Second Edition. McGraw-Hill.
(158)
Ross, K. A. and C. R. B. Wright (1992), Discrete Mathematics, 3rd Edition. Prentice-Hall.
(158, 179)
Rota, G.-C. (1996), Indiscrete Thoughts. Birkhauser. (141, 148, 268, 412, 475)
499

contents

wordlist

index

Rota, G.-C. (1997), ‘The many lives of lattice theory’. Notices of the American Mathematical
Society, volume 44, pages 1440–1445. (204)
Rudin, W. (1966), Real and Complex Analysis. McGraw-Hill. (382)
Schoenfeld, A. (1985), Mathematical Problem Solving. Academic Press. (155, 432)
Schoenfeld, A., editor (1987a), Cognitive Science and Mathematics Education. Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates. (499)
Schoenfeld, A. (1987b), ‘What’s all the fuss about metacognition?’. In [Schoenfeld, 1987a] .
(400)
Schoenfeld, A., J. Kaput, and E. Dubinsky, editors (1998), Research in Collegiate Mathematics
Education III. American Mathematical Society. (492, 497)
Schwartzman, S. (1994), The Words of Mathematics. American Mathematical Society. (150,
216)
Schweiger, F. (1994a), ‘Die Aesthetik der mathematischen Sprache und ihre didaktische
Bedeutung’. In Genießen – Verstehen – Ver¨nder. Kunst und Wissenschaft im Gespr¨ch,
a
a
Kyrer, A. and W. Roscher, editors, pages 99–112. Verlag Ursula M¨ller-Speiser. (291)
u
Schweiger, F. (1994b), ‘Mathematics is a language’. In Selected Lectures from the 7th
International Congress on Mathematical Education, Robitaille, D. F., D. H. Wheeler, and C.
Kieran, editors. Sainte-Foy: Presses de l’Universit´ Laval. (291)
e
Schweiger, F. (1996), ‘Die Sprache der Mathematik aus linguistischer Sicht’. Beitr¨ge zum
a
Mathematikunterricht, volume 1996, pages 44–51. (31, 291)
Selden, A. and J. Selden (1992), ‘Research perspectives on conceptions of functions’. In [Harel
and Dubinsky, 1992] , pages 1–16. (201, 202)
Selden, A. and J. Selden (1997), ‘Constructivism in mathematics education—what does it
mean?’. Available by web browser from
http://forum.swarthmore.edu/orlando/construct.selden.html. (100)
Selden, A. and J. Selden (1998), ‘The role of examples in learning mathematics’. Available by
web browser from http://www.maa.org/t and l/sampler/rs 5.html. (164)
Sfard, A. (1992), ‘Operational origins of mathematical objects and the quandary of reiﬁcation –
the case of function’. In [Harel and Dubinsky, 1992] , pages 59–84. (37, 202, 384)
Sfard, A. (1994), ‘Reiﬁcation as the birth of metaphor’. For the Learning of Mathematics,
volume 14, pages 44–55. (300, 384)
500

contents

wordlist

index

Sfard, A. (1997), ‘Commentary: On metaphorical roots of conceptual growth’. In [English,
1997] , pages 339–372. Reviewed in [Dubinsky, 1999] . (300)
Silver, E., editor (1985), Teaching and Learning Mathematical Problem Solving. Erlbaum. (500)
Sloboda, J. A. and D. Rogers, editors (1987), Cognitive Processes in Mathematics. Clarendon
Press. (499)
Solow, D. (1995), The Keys to Advanced Mathematics: Recurrent Themes in Abstract
Reasoning. BookMasters Distribution Center. (452)
Steenrod, N. E., P. R. Halmos, M. M. Schiﬀer, and J. A. Dieudonn´ (1975), How to Write
e
Mathematics. American Mathematical Society. (101, 188, 211, 215, 221, 291, 291, 483)
Tall, D., editor (1992a), Advanced Mathematical Thinking, volume 11 of Mathematics Education
Library. Kluwer Academic Publishers. (206, 296, 492, 492, 493, 494, 494, 500, 500, 501)
Tall, D. (1992b), ‘The psychology of advanced mathematical thinking’. In [Tall, 1992a] , pages
3–21. (206, 296, 296)
Tall, D. (1992c), ‘Reﬂections’. In [Tall, 1992a] , pages 251–259. (432)
Tall, D. and S. Vinner (1981), ‘Concept image and concept deﬁnition in mathematics with
particular reference to limits and continuity’. Educational Studies in Mathematics, volume
22, pages 125–147. (83, 125, 296, 371)
Thom, R. (1992), ‘Leaving mathematics for philosophy’. In [Casacuberta and Castellet, 1992] ,
pages 1–12. (487)
Thompson, P. W. (1985), ‘Experience, problem-solving, and learning mathematics:
Considerations in developing mathematical curricula’. In [Silver, 1985] , pages 189–236. (17)
Thompson, P. W. (1994), ‘Students, functions and the undergraduate curriculum’. In
[Dubinsky, Schoenfeld and Kaput, 1994] , pages 21–44. (37, 200, 202, 386)
Thurston, W. P. (1990), ‘Mathematical education’. Notices of the American Mathematical
Society, volume 7, pages 844–850. (320)
Vallance, E. (1977), ‘Hiding the hidden curriculum: An interpretation of the language of
justiﬁcation in nineteenth-century educational reform’. In [Bellack and Kliebard, 1977] ,
pages 590–607. (115)
van Benthem, J. and A. ter Meulen (1997), Handbook of Logic and Language. The MIT Press.
(495, 497, 497, 501)
van Dalen, D. (1989), Logic and Structure. Springer-Verlag. (285, 401)
501

contents

wordlist

index

van Eijck, J. and H. Kamp (1997), ‘Representing discourse in context’. In [van Benthem and ter
Meulen, 1997] , pages 179–239. (136)
Vaught, R. L. (1973), ‘Some aspects of the theory of models’. American Mathematical Monthly,
volume 80, pages 3–37. (148)
Vinner, S. (1992), ‘The role of deﬁnitions in the teaching and learning of mathematics’. In
[Tall, 1992a] , pages 65–81. (88, 125)
Vinner, S. and T. Dreyfus (1989), ‘Images and deﬁnitions for the notion of function’. Journal
for Research in Mathematics Education, volume 20, pages 356–366. (83, 125, 202, 386)
Wells, C. (1995), ‘Communicating mathematics: Useful ideas from computer science’. American
Mathematical Monthly, volume 102, pages 397–408. Also available by web browser from URL:
http://www.cwru.edu/artsci/math/wells/pub/papers.html. (11, 54, 90, 167, 202, 296,
307, 400, 406, 412, 456, 457)
Wells, C. (1997), ‘Discrete mathematics’. Class notes, Case Western Reserve University. (41,
111, 406)
Wheatley, G. H. (1997), ‘Reasoning with images in mathematical activity’. In [English, 1997] ,
pages 281–298. Reviewed in [Dubinsky, 1999] . (296)
Wolfram, S. (1997), The Mathematica Book. Wolfram Media. (433)
Wood, L. (1999), ‘Teaching deﬁnitions in undergraduate mathematics’. Available by web
browser from http://www.bham.ac.uk/ctimath/talum/newsletter/talum10.htm. (125)
Wood, L. and G. Perrett (1997), Advanced Mathematical Discourse. University of Technology,
Sydney. (169, 464)
Zulli, L. (1996), ‘Charting the 3-sphere—an exposition for undergraduates’. American
Mathematical Monthly, volume 103, pages 221–229. (339)

502

Citations
Links are given to every location where the text is cited.
4. (40, 462)
1. (316)
Aldous, D. and P. Diaconis (1986), ‘Shuﬄing
Adem, A. (1997), ‘Recent developments in the
cards and stopping times’. American
cohomology of ﬁnite groups’. Notices of the
American Mathematical Society, volume , pages Mathematical Monthly, volume 93, pages
333–348.
806–812.
[p. 333. Lines 3–2 above Figure 1.]
[p. 806. Lines 20–22, second column.]
Now taking generators for IG as a ZG-module, By an inductive argument, all (n − 1)!
arrangements of the lower cards are equally
we can map a free ZG-module of ﬁnite rank
likely.
onto IG.
2. (294)
Adler, A. and S.-Y. R. Li (1977), ‘Magic cubes
and Prouhet sequences’. American
Mathematical Monthly, volume 84, pages
618–627.
[p. 619. Lines 12–13.]
Definitions. By an N -cube of order T , we
mean an N -dimensional array of T N
N -dimensional boxes.
3. (188)
Akin, E. and M. Davis (1985), ‘Bulgarian
solitaire’. American Mathematical Monthly,
volume 92, pages 237–250.
[p. 243. Line 3.]
We have already proved (a) and the formal
proof of (b) is very similar.

5. (405)
Antman, S. S. (1980), ‘The equations for large
vibrations of strings’. American Mathematical
Monthly, volume 87, pages 359–370.
[p. 364. Formula 3.10..]
Let us set
η(x, t) = φ(x)ψ(t)e
6. (230)
Anton, H. (1984), Elementary Linear Algebra,
Fourth Edition. John Wiley and Sons.
[p. 90. Lines 4–7.]
7. (327)
Anton, H. (1984), Elementary Linear Algebra,
Fourth Edition. John Wiley and Sons.
[p. 91. Lines 8–4 from bottom.]
503

contents

wordlist

8. (367)
Anton, H. (1984), Elementary Linear Algebra,
Fourth Edition. John Wiley and Sons.
[p. 113. Lines 22–24.]
9. (64, 111, 121, 265, 334, 358)
Anton, H. (1984), Elementary Linear Algebra,
Fourth Edition. John Wiley and Sons.
[p. 121. Lines 10–13.]
10.
Anton, H. (1984), Elementary Linear Algebra,
Fourth Edition. John Wiley and Sons.
[p. 176. Lines 8–10 of Section 4.7.]
11. (123, 217)
Applebaum, C. H. (1971), ‘ω-homomorphisms
and ω-groups’. Journal of Symbolic Logic,
volume 36, pages 55–65.
[p. 56. Lines 9–8 from the bottom.]
Definition. The ω-group G1 is
ω-homomorphic to the ω-group G2 [written:
G − 1 ≥ω G2 ] if there is at least one
ω-homomorphism from G1 onto G2 .
12. (41)
Arbib, M. A. and E. G. Manes (1974),
‘Machines in a category: An expository
introduction’. SIAM Review, volume 16, pages
163–192.
[p. 169. Lines 1–4.]
A group may be thought of as a set with 3

index

operators, a binary operation labeled · (we say
the label · has arity 2 since · labels a 2-ary
operator); a unary operation labeled 1 (which
has arity 1), and a constant labeled e (we say e
has arity 0, and refer to constants as nullary
operators).
13.
Arratia, R., A. D. Barbour, and S. Tavar´
e
(1997), ‘Random combinatorial structures and
prime factorizations’. Notices of the American
Mathematical Society, volume , pages –.
[p. –. .]
We call combinatorial structures that have this
property “logarithmic”.
14. (183)
Axler, S. (1995), ‘Down with determinants!’.
American Mathematical Monthly, volume 102,
pages 139–154.
[p. 140. Lines 12–11 from bottom.]
To show that T (our linear operator on V ) has
an eigenvalue, ﬁx any non-zero vector v ∈ V .
15.
Axler, S. (1995), ‘Down with determinants!’.
American Mathematical Monthly, volume 102,
pages 139–154.
[p. 142. Proposition 3.4.]
The generalized eigenvectors of T span V .

504

contents

wordlist

16. (123)
Baer, R. (1955), ‘Supersoluble groups’.
Proceedings of the American Mathematical
Society, volume 6, pages 16–32.
[p. 16. Lines 18–19.]
Definition. The group G is supersoluble if
every homomorphic image H = 1 of G contains
a cyclic normal subgroup diﬀerent from 1.
17. (30, 462)
Balinski, M. L. and H. P. Young (1977),
‘Apportionment schemes and the quota
method’. American Mathematical Monthly,
volume 84, pages 450.
[p. 451. Theorem 1.]
An apportionment method M is
house-monotone and consistent if and only if it
is a Huntington method.

We follow the customary approach in
elementary calculus courses by using the
x
deﬁnition ln(x) = 1 t−1 dt.
20. (144, 216, 483)
Bartle, R. C. (1996), ‘Return to the Riemann
integral’. American Mathematical Monthly,
volume 103, pages 625–632.
[p. 626. Lines 17–19 and 36.]
Usually the partition is ordered and the
intervals are speciﬁed by their end points; thus
Ii := [xi−1 , xi ], where
a = x0 < x1 < · · · < xi−1 < xi < · · · < xn = b.
. . . A strictly positive function δ on I is called
a gauge on I.

18. (214)
Baker, H. H., A. K. Dewdney, and A. L. Szilard
(1974), ‘Generating the nine-point graphs’.
Mathematics of Computation, volume 28, pages
833–838.
[p. 835. Lines 4–3 above Figure 2.]
In Fig. 2(a) below, a nine-point graph is shown.
19. (273)
Barnes, C. W. (1984), ‘Euler’s constant and e’.
American Mathematical Monthly, volume 91,
pages 428–430.
[p. 429. Lilnes 10–11.]

index

[Shouldn’t the [0, 1] be a superscript
below? (And similarly in the
following citation).]
21. (53)
Bartle, R. C. (1996), ‘Return to the Riemann
integral’. American Mathematical Monthly,
volume 103, pages 625–632.
[p. 627. Lines 23–24.]
(3.2) If h : [0, 1] → R is Dirichlet’s function ( =
the characteristic function of the rational
numbers in [0, 1]), then h ∈ R∗ ([0, 1]) and
1
0 h = 0.

505

contents

wordlist

22. (80, 224, 339, 421, 425, 446, 462)
Bartle, R. C. (1996), ‘Return to the Riemann
integral’. American Mathematical Monthly,
volume 103, pages 625–632.
[p. 631. Lines 3–6, 13–14, 19.]
(8.2) Dominated Convergence Theorem. Let
(fn ) be a sequence in R∗ ([a, b]), let g,
h ∈ R∗ ([a, b]) be such that
g(x) ≤ fn (x) ≤ h(x)

for all

x ∈ [a, b],

and let f (x) = limn fn (x) ∈ R for all x ∈ [a, b].
Then f ∈ R∗ ([a, b]) and (8a) holds.
. . . As usual, we deﬁne a null set in I := [a, b]
to be a set that can be covered by a countable
union of intervals with arbitrarily small total
length.
. . . Every f ∈ R∗ (I) is measurable on I.
23. (147, 184)
Bell, H., J. R. Blum, J. V. Lewis, and J.
Rosenblatt (1966), Modern University Calculus
with Coordinate Geometry. Holden-Day, Inc.
[p. 48. Proof.]
Proof. Let N be the set of those positive
integers which satisfy the following conditions:
(a) 1 is a member of N ,
(b) whenever x is a member of N , then x ≥ 1.
We need to show that N is precisely the set of
all positive integers to prove our result.

index

24. (66, 373)
Bass, H. and R. Kulkarni (1990), ‘Uniform tree
lattices’. Journal of the American
Mathematical Society, volume 3, pages 843–902.
[p. 845. Lines 22–23.]
We put i(e) = [A∂0 e : αe Ae ] and call
(A, i) = I(A) the corresponding edge-indexed
graph.
25. (349)
Bauer, F. L. (1977), ‘Angstl’s mechanism for
checking wellformedness of parenthesis-free
formulae’. Mathematics of Computation,
volume 31, pages 318–320.
[p. 318. Just below the ﬁrst ﬁgure.]
The formula in parenthesis-free (polish) form
[2] is now written over the ﬁxed bars . . .
26. (214, 319)
Bauer, H. (1978), ‘Approximation and abstract
boundaries’. American Mathematical Monthly,
volume 85, pages 632–647.
[p. 644. Lines 4–2 above the ﬁgure.]
We obtain
Φ(X) =

x, u(x) | x ∈ [a, b]

which is the graph of the function u.
27. (122, 123)
Bellamy, D. P. (1975), ‘Weak chainability of
pseudocones’. Proceedings of the American

506

contents

wordlist

Mathematical Society, volume 48, pages
476–478.
[p. 476. Lines 1–4.]
A continuum is a compact metric space.
I = [0, 1]; A = (0, 1]; S is the unit circle in the
complex numbers. If X is a continuum, a
pseudocone over X is a compactiﬁcation of A
with remainder X.
28. (199)
Bell, H., J. R. Blum, J. V. Lewis, and J.
Rosenblatt (1966), Modern University Calculus
with Coordinate Geometry. Holden-Day, Inc.
[p. 186. Theorem 3.4.]
3.4. Theorem: Alternative deﬁnition of
monotone. The function f is monotone
increasing on A if and only if, whenever x and
x + h > x are in A ⊆ dmn f , we have
f (x + h) − f (x) > 0.
29. (117, 199)
Belna, C. L., M. J. Evans, and P. D. Humke
(1979), ‘Symmetric and strong diﬀerentiation’.
American Mathematical Monthly, volume 86,
pages 121–123.
[p. 121. Line 1.]
Throughout we let f denote a real valued
function deﬁned on the real line R.

index

Bendersky, M. and D. M. Davis (1994),
‘3-primary v1 -periodic homotopy groups of F4
and E6 ’. Transactions of the American
Mathematical Society, volume 344, pages
291–306.
[p. 295. Lines 5–4 from bottom.]
The Toda bracket −, 3, α1 is essentially
multiplication by v1 , which acts nontrivially
from v4i+2 S 23 to v4i+6 S 23 .
31. (260)
Bezem, M. (1989), ‘Compact and majorizable
functionals of ﬁnite type’. Journal of Symbolic
Logic, volume 54, pages 271–280.
[p. 271. Lines 8–6 from bottom.]
We shall occasionally use lambda-notation to
specify functionals, ie λX.— speciﬁes a
functional F such that F X = — for all X.
32. (265, 462)
˘
Bhatia, R. and P. Semrl (1997), ‘Approximate
isometries on Euclidean spaces’. American
Mathematical Monthly, volume 104, pages
497–504.
[p. 502. Lemma 3.]
Lemma 3. Let f and g be as in Lemma 2, and
let u ∈ En be a unit vector. Then for every
x ∈ En orthogonal to u we have
| f (x), g(u) | ≤ 3ε.

30. (63)

507

contents

wordlist

For an illustration of this theorem, suppose the
A in (10) is the set [x : α ≤ x(1) ≤ β] of paths
in C0 [0, 1] that over the point t = 1 have a
height between α and β.

33. (328)
˘
Bhatia, R. and P. Semrl (1997), ‘Approximate
isometries on Euclidean spaces’. American
Mathematical Monthly, volume 104, pages
497–504.
[p. 503. Line 9 from bottom.]
Since f is an ε-isometry, we have

36. (181)
Birman, J. S. (1993), ‘New points of view in
knot theory’. Bulletin of the American
Mathematical Society (N.S.), volume 28, pages
253–287.
[p. 279. Lines 23–24.]
Using Lemma 2, we ﬁnd a closed braid
representative Kβ of BK, β ∈ Bn .

m − ε < f (x + my) − f (x) < m + ε,
or equivalently,
m − ε < (m − a + bm )y + um < m + ε.
34. (91, 216)
Bieri, R. and J. R. J. Groves (1986), ‘A rigidity
property for the set of all characters induced by
valuations’. Transactions of the American
Mathematical Society, volume 294, pages
425–434.
[p. 425. Abstract.]
We prove that ∆(G) satisﬁes a certain rigidity
property and apply this to give a new and
conceptual proof of the Brewster-Roseblade
result [4] on the group of automorphisms
stabilizing G.
35. (216, 216, 233)
Billingsley, P. (1973), ‘Prime numbers and
Brownian motion’. American Mathematical
Monthly, volume 80, pages 1099–1115.
[p. 1107. Lines 3–2 from bottom.]

index

37. (109, 462)
Blass, A. (1979), ‘Natural endomorphisms of
Burnside rings’. Transactions of the American
Mathematical Society, volume 253, pages
121–137.
[p. 122. Lines 19–20.]
For any two G-sets X and Y , there are obvious
actions of G on the disjoint union X + Y and
(componentwise) on the product X × Y .
38. (122, 124)
Blecksmith, R., M. McCallum, and J. L.
Selfridge (1998), ‘3-smooth representations of
integers’. American Mathematical Monthly,
volume , pages 529–543.
[p. 529. Lines 6–7 of Introduction.]
A 3-smooth number is a positive integer whose
prime divisors are only 2 or 3.

508

contents

wordlist

39. (113, 113, 339)
Blecksmith, R., M. McCallum, and J. L.
Selfridge (1998), ‘3-smooth representations of
integers’. American Mathematical Monthly,
volume , pages 529–543.
[p. 535. Lines 10–9 from bottom.]
Corollary. Assume that n > 1 is prime to 6.
Then n has a unique representation if and only
if the 2-rep and the 3-rep of n agree.

index

42. (453)
Bridges, D. S. (1977), ‘A constructive look at
orthonormal bases in Hilbert space’. American
Mathematical Monthly, volume 84, pages
189–191.
[p. 189. End of second paragraph.]
We also consider the trivial space {0} to be of
ﬁnite dimension 0.

40. (470)
Boudreau, P. E., J. J. S. Griﬃn, and M. Kac
(1962), ‘An elementary queueing problem’.
American Mathematical Monthly, volume 69,
pages 713–724.
[p. 717. Lines 19–21.]
But the analyticity of G(z, w) requires that the
numerator of the fraction vanish whenever the
denominator does.
41. (393)
Bredon, G. E. (1971), ‘Counterexamples on the
rank of a manifold’. Proceedings of the
American Mathematical Society, volume 27,
pages 592–594.
[p. 592. Lines 3–5.]
The Poincar´ polynomial of M is
e
PM (t) = bi ti where bi is the ith Betti number
of M . Thus rank M ≥ 1 iﬀ −1 is a root of
PM (t).

43. (76)
Britt, J. (1985), ‘The anatomy of low
dimensional stable singularities’. American
Mathematical Monthly, volume 92, pages
183–201.
[p. 184. Lines 7–9.]
The mapping behaves very diﬀerently at
singular points from the way it does at regular
ones, where locally it behaves as if it were a
mapping onto its codomain.
44. (53, 62, 146, 407, 459)
Brickman, L. (1993), ‘The symmetry principle
for M¨bius transformations’. American
o
Mathematical Monthly, volume 100, pages
781–782.
[p. 782. Lemma 2.]
Lemma 2.For each circle or extended line E,
¯
¯
there is a unique T ∈ M such that
ˆ ¯
E = {z ∈ C : T (z) = z}.
¯
(E is exactly the set of ﬁxed points of T .) This

509

contents

wordlist

ˆ
¯
¯ ¯
T is an involution of C; that is, T ◦ T is the
identity.
45. (109, 156, 458)
Brink, C. and J. Pretorius (1992), ‘Boolean
circulants, groups, and relation algebras’.
American Mathematical Monthly, volume 99,
pages 146–152.
[p. 146. Lines 18–22.]
Let Bn be the algebra which has as the base set
all n-square Boolean matrices and is endowed
with the componentwise Boolean operations of
complementation , meet · and join + (under
which it forms a Boolean algebra) as well as the
matrix operations of transposition and
multiplication ; , and the identity matrix I.
46. (94, 265)
Bruce, J. W. (1993), ‘A really trivial proof of
the Lucas-Lehmer test’. American
Mathematical Monthly, volume 100, pages
370–371.
[p. 370. Theorem 1.]
Theorem 1 (LUCAS-LEHMER). Let p be a
prime number. Then Mp = 2p − 1 is a prime if
Mp divides Sp−1 .
47. (184, 233)
Bruckner, A. M., J. Marik, and C. E. Weil
(1002), ‘Some aspects of products of
derivatives’. American Mathematical Monthly,
volume 99, pages 134–145.

index

[p. 140. Lines 2–3.]
As an illustration of this theorem let us consider
a function u with the following properties . . .
48. (462)
Bryant, V. (1993), Aspects of Combinatorics.
Cambridge University Press.
[p. 30. Lines 14–15.]
49. (150, 365)
Bryant, V. (1993), Aspects of Combinatorics.
Cambridge University Press.
[p. 42. Line 6 from bottom.]
50. (46, 462)
Bryant, V. (1993), Aspects of Combinatorics.
Cambridge University Press.
[p. 62. Lines 10–18.]
51. (326)
Buckholtz, D. (1997), ‘Inverting the diﬀerence
of Hilbert space projections’. American
Mathematical Monthly, volume 104, pages
60–61.
[p. 60. Lines 1–3.]
Let R and K be subspaces of a Hilbert space
H, and let PR and PK denote the orthogonal
projections of H onto these subspaces. When is
the operator PR − PK invertible? . . .

510

contents

wordlist

52. (94, 94)
Buhler, J., D. Eisenbud, R. Graham, and C.
Wright (1994), ‘Juggling drops and descents’.
American Mathematical Monthly, volume 101,
pages 507–519.
[p. 513. Lines 8–9.]
Which ﬁnite sequences correspond to juggling
patterns? Certainly a necessary condition is
that the average must be an integer. However
this isn’t suﬃcient.
53. (181)
Bumby, R. T., F. Kochman, and D. B. West,
editors (1993a), ‘Problems and solutions’.
American Mathematical Monthly, volume 100,
pages 796–809.
[p. 796. Problem 10331.]
Find all positive integers n such that n! is
multiply perfect; i.e., a divisor of the sum of its
positive divisors.
54. (58, 327, 425)
Bumby, R. T., F. Kochman, and D. B. West,
editors (1993b), ‘Problems and solutions’.
American Mathematical Monthly, volume 100,
pages 498–505.
[p. 499. Problem 10311.]
It is well-known that if g is a primitive root
modulo p, where p > 2 is prime, either g or
g + p (or both) is a primitive root modulo p2
(indeed modulo pk for all k ≥ 1.)

index

55. (21)
Burgstahler, S. (1986), ‘An algorithm for
solving polynomial equations’. American
Mathematical Monthly, volume 93, pages
421–430.
[p. 423. Lines 7–11.]
The new algorithm can now be described. To
approximate roots of P (x) = 0 (which, without
loss of generality, is assumed not to have a root
at x = 0):
Step 1: If the desired root is known to be near
the origin, solve P (1/z) = 0 for z = 1/x.
Step 2: Determine a preliminary root estimate
R = 0.
Step 3: Use R and formula (6) to ﬁnd xi and
replace R by this number.
Step 4: If R is unsatisfactory as a root estimate,
repeat step 3. (Or repeat step 1 if |R|
1.)
56. (209, 388)
Burton, D. M. (1994), Elementary Number
Theory, Third Edition. Wm C. Brown
Publishers.
[p. 17. Theorem 2–1.]
57. (94, 113, 446)
Burton, D. M. (1994), Elementary Number
Theory, Third Edition. Wm C. Brown
Publishers.
[p. 24. Corollary 2.]

511

contents

wordlist

index

matrices’. American Mathematical Monthly,
volume 100, pages 372–376.
[p. 375. Theorem 5.]
Theorem 5. For every real number x,
P [x] = exL .

58. (389)
Burckel, R. B. (1997), ‘Three secrets about
harmonic functions’. American Mathematical
Monthly, volume 104, pages 52–56.
[p. 55. Lines 4–6.]
In fact, this result is part of a large subject
called quadrature problems that interested
readers can ﬁnd more about in . . .
59. (18)
Busenberg, S., D. C. Fisher, and M. Martelli
(1989), ‘Minimal periods of discrete and
smooth orbits’. American Mathematical
Monthly, volume 96, pages 5–17.
[p. 8. Lines 2–4.]
Therefore, a normed linear space is really a pair
(E, · ) where E is a linear vector space and
· : E → (0, ∞) is a norm. In speaking of
normed spaces, we will frequently abuse this
notation and write E instead of the pair
(E, · ).
60. (379)
Call, G. S. and D. J. Velleman (1993), ‘Pascal’s
matrices’. American Mathematical Monthly,
volume 100, pages 372–376.
[p. 373. Theorem 2.]
Theorem 2. For any real numbers x and y,
P [x]P [y] = P [x + y].
61.
Call, G. S. and D. J. Velleman (1993), ‘Pascal’s

62. (216, 216)
Carr, D. M. (1982), ‘The minimal normal ﬁlter
on pκ λ’. Proceedings of the American
Mathematical Society, volume 86, pages
316–320.
[p. 316. Lines 2–3.]
Unless speciﬁed otherwise, κ denotes an
uncountable regular cardinal and λ is a cardinal
≥ κ.
63. (53, 462)
Chow, T. Y. (1999), ‘What is a closed-form
number?’. American Mathematical Monthly,
volume 106, pages 440–448.
[p. 444. Lines 12–14.]
Deﬁnition. A tower is a ﬁnite sequence
A = (α1 , α2 , . . . , αn ) of nonzero complex
numbers such that for all i ∈ {1, 2, . . . n} there
exists some integer mi > 0 such that
m
αi i ∈ Ai−1 or eαi mi ∈ Ai−1 (or both).
64. (258)
Cliﬀord, A. H. (1959), ‘Connected ordered
topological semigroups with idempotent
endpoints II’. Transactions of the American

512

contents

wordlist

index

Curjel, C. R. (1990), ‘Understanding vector
ﬁelds’. American Mathematical Monthly,
volume 97, pages 524–527.
[p. 524. Lines 17–16 from bottom.]
In the following exercises students have to use
ruler and pencil to work on graphs and curves
given by drawings.

Mathematical Society, volume 91, pages
193–208.
[p. 106. Lines 4–1 from bottom.]
The binary operation in S, which we now
denote by ◦, is completely determined by that
in T , which we denote by juxtaposition, and
the mappings ψ and θ as follows (wherein
x, y ∈ T 0 ; t ∈ T ; κ, λ ∈ K):

68. (66, 120, 132, 217)
Currie, J. (1993), ‘Open problems in pattern
avoidance’. American Mathematical Monthly,
volume 100, pages 790–793.
[p. 790. Lines 8–3 from bottom.]
A word is a ﬁnite sequence of elements of some
ﬁnite set Σ. We call the set Σ the alphabet, the
elements of Σ letters. The set of all words over
Σ is written Σ∗ .
. . . The empty word, with no letters, is
denoted by ε.

65. (94)
Copper, M. (1993), ‘Graph theory and the
game of Sprouts’. American Mathematical
Monthly, volume 100, pages 478–482.
[p. 480. Lemma 1.]
Suppose that the cubic graph G arises as just
described from a complete game of Sprouts
played on m vertices in p plays. Then
f =2+p−m
66. (161)
Culler, M. and P. B. Shalen (1992),
‘Paradoxical decompositions, 2-generator
Kleinian groups, and volumes of hyperbolic
3-manifolds’. Journal of the American
Mathematical Society, volume 5, pages 231–288.
[p. 235. Lines 7–6 from bottom.]
We establish some notation and conventions
that will be used throughout the paper.

69. (214)
Dankner, A. (1978), ‘On Smale’s axiom A
dynamical systems’. Annals of Mathematics,
volume 107, pages 517–553.
[p. 539. 5.2.7.]
On {r4 ≤ r ≤ r5 and z ≤ z2 } the action of f on
z-coordinates is multiplication by e(r), where
e(r) is a smooth bump function with graph
shown in Figure 4.

67. (214)

513

contents

wordlist

70. (130, 216, 414)
Darst, R. and C. Goﬀman (1970), ‘A Borel set
which contains no rectangles’. American
Mathematical Monthly, volume 77, pages
728–729.
[p. 729. Line 23.]
Then φ(0) = m1 ([U ∩ F ] ∩ [U ∩ G]) > .8 .

index

[p. 222. Lines 10–9 from bottom.]
That is, if a point is contained in J(F ), then so
are all of its images and all of its preimages.
74. (265)
ˇ
Z. Djokovi´, D. (1982), ‘Closures of conjugacy
c
classes in classical real linear Lie groups. II’.
Transactions of the American Mathematical
Society, volume 270, pages 217–252.
[p. 233. Lines 1 and 8.]
Let ﬁrst k = 0, i.e, m = n. . . . Now let k > 0.
...

71. (78, 306, 310, 329, 374, 489)
Davey, B. A. and H. A. Priestley (1990),
Introduction to Lattices and Order. Cambridge
University Press.
[p. 3. Beginning of 1.4.]
Each of N (the natural numbers {1, 2, 3, . . . }),
Z (the integers) and Q (the rational numbers)
also has a natural order making it a chain.

75. (146, 232)
Dornhoﬀ, L. L. and F. E. Hohn (1978), Applied
Modern Algebra. Macmillan.
[p. 166. Lines 1–3.]
A monoid [M, ◦] with identity element 1 is a
group iﬀ for each m ∈ M there is an inverse
element m−1 ∈ M such that

72. (216)
de Boor, C. and K. H¨llig (1991), ‘Box-spline
o
tilings’. American Mathematical Monthly,
volume 98, pages 793–802.
[p. 795. Line 6 from bottom.]
In this situation, it is convenient to introduce
the new variables

m−1 ◦ m = m ◦ m−1 = 1

(u, v) := ΞT x = (ξ T x, η T x).
73. (147)
Devaney, R. L. and M. B. Durkin (1991), ‘The
exploding exponential and other chaotic bursts
in complex dynamics’. American Mathematical
Monthly, volume 98, pages 217–233.

76. (110)
Downey, R. and J. F. Knight (1992), ‘Orderings
with αth jump degree 0α ’. Proceedings of the
American Mathematical Society, volume 114,
pages 545–552.
[p. 546. Lemma 1.1.]
If C is r.e. in X but not recursive in X, then
there is an ordering A such that A is recursive
in C and no copy of A is recursive in C.

514

contents

wordlist

index

77. (82, 339)
Drasin, D. (1995), ‘Review of (a) Normal
families of meromorphic functions, by Chi-tai
Chung, and (b) Normal families, by Joel L.
Schiﬀ’. Bulletin of the American Mathematical
Society (N.S.), volume 32, pages 257–260.
[p. 258. First line of Theorem.]
Let D be a domain, a, b = 0 two complex
numbers and k ≥ 1 an integer.

80. (414)
Dummigan, N. (1995), ‘The determinants of
certain Mordell-Weil lattices’. American
Journal of Mathematics, volume 117, pages
1409–1429.
[p. 1419. Last line of Deﬁnition 1..]
We denote the circle diagram by enclosing the
string diagram in square brackets, e.g.
[XOXOX].

78.
Dubins, L. E. (1977), ‘Group decision devices’.
American Mathematical Monthly, volume 84,
pages 350–356.
[p. 353. Line 6.]
Proof. For each d, u(d, ·) has an inverse
function u−1 (d, ·), where

81. (414)
Feeman, T. G. and O. Marrero (2000),
‘Sequences of chords and of parabolic segments
enclosing proportional areas’. The College
Mathematics Journal, volume 31, pages
379–382.
[p. 381. Second to last displayed formula.]

u(d, c) = t ↔ u−1 (d, t) = c.
79. (53, 238, 313)
Duke, W. (1997), ‘Some old problems and new
results about quadratic forms’. Notices of the
American Mathematical Society, volume 44,
pages 190–196.
[p. 193. Lines 9–13, second column.]
. . . it can be seen that the number of
representations of n as a sum of four squares is
eight times the sum of those divisors of n which
are not multiples of four. In particular, it is
never zero!

1≤

L2
[1 + c (an+1 + an )]2
c2
n
≤
→ 2 =1
d2
c
1 + c2 (an+1 + an )2
n

82. (65, 216)
Edelman, A. and E. Kostlan (1995), ‘How many
zeros of a random polynomial are real?’.
Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society
(N.S.), volume 32, pages 1–37.
[p. 7. Lines 6–5 from the bottom.]
If v(t) is the moment curve, then we may
calculate γ (t) with the help of the following
observations and some messy algebra:

515

contents

wordlist

83. (408, 462)
Edgar, G. A., D. H. Ullman, and D. B. West,
editors (1997), ‘Problems and solutions’.
American Mathematical Monthly, volume 104,
pages 566–576.
[p. 574. Problem 10426.]
Show that any integer can be expressed as a
sum of two squares and a cube. Note that the
integer being represented and the cube are both
allowed to be negative.
84. (64, 370)
Epp, S. S. (1995), Discrete Mathematics with
Applications, 2nd Ed. Brooks/Cole.
[p. 2. Blue box.]
85.
Epp, S. S. (1995), Discrete Mathematics with
Applications, 2nd Ed. Brooks/Cole.
[p. 30. Lines 11.]
86. (19, 184)
Epp, S. S. (1995), Discrete Mathematics with
Applications, 2nd Ed. Brooks/Cole.
[p. 36. Lines 21–24.]
87. (132, 306, 310)
Epp, S. S. (1995), Discrete Mathematics with
Applications, 2nd Ed. Brooks/Cole.
[p. 76. Lines 12–11 from bottom.]
88. (124, 147, 209, 230, 385)

index

Epp, S. S. (1995), Discrete Mathematics with
Applications, 2nd Ed. Brooks/Cole.
[p. 534. Blue box.]
89. (160, 458)
Exner, G. R. (1996), An Accompaniment to
Higher Mathematics. Springer-Verlag.
[p. 35. Theorem 1.115.]
Suppose E is an equivalence relation on a set S.
For any x in S, denote by Ex the set of all y
in S equivalent under E to x. Then the
collection of all Ex is a partition of S.
90. (184, 216, 224)
Farrell, F. T. and L. E. Jones (1989), ‘A
topological analogue of Mostow’s rigidity
theorem’. Journal of the American
Mathematical Society, volume , pages 257–370.
[p. 272. Lemma 2.1.]
The following inequalities hold for any vector η
tangent to a leaf of the foliation F of F M .
ˆ
2h (dq(η), dq(η)) ≥ h(η, η) ≥ h (dq(η), dq(η))
where q : DM → M denotes the bundle
projections.
91. (258)
Fearnley-Sander, D. (1982), ‘Hermann
Grassmann and the prehistory of universal
algebra’. American Mathematical Monthly,
volume 89, pages 161–166.
[p. 161. Lines 16–12 from bottom.]

516

contents

wordlist

index

dom(f ) and constant value 1 is in the domain
of T . . .

Given a set of symbols S = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xn },
the set

94. (380)
Fournelle, T. A. (1993), ‘Symmetries of the
(xn xn ), x(x1 (x1 x1 )), (x1 (x1 x2 )), . . . ,
cube and outer automorphisms of S6 ’.
(x1 (xn xn )), (x2 (x1 x1 )), . . . ,
American Mathematical Monthly, volume 100,
(xn (xn xn )), ((x1 x1 )x1 ), ((x1 x1 )x2 ), . . . }
pages 377–380.
[p. 377. Line 9 above picture.]
obtained by repeated juxtaposition of the
To begin, recall that an isometry of R3 is a
symbols already written down, forms a
groupoid in a natural way (the binary operation bijection which preserves distance.
being juxtaposition).
95. (325)
G = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xn , (x1 x1 ), (x1 x2 ), . . . ,

Fraleigh, J. B. (1982), A First Course in
Abstract Algebra. Addison-Wesley.
[p. 11. Lines 4–5 of Section 1.2.]

92. (217, 367)
Finn, R. (1999), ‘Capillary surface interfaces’.
Notices of the American Mathematical Society,
volume 46, pages 770–781.
[p. 774. Formula (11) and the line above.]
The same procedure with Ω∗ = Ω yields
2H =

96. (124, 354, 407, 458)
Fraleigh, J. B. (1982), A First Course in
Abstract Algebra. Addison-Wesley.
[p. 41. Lines 6–7.]

|Σ| cos γ
|Ω|

93. (144, 144, 147, 198)
Fisher, D. (1982), ‘Extending functions to
inﬁnitesimals of ﬁnite order’. American
Mathematical Monthly, volume 89, pages
443–449.
[p. 445. Lines 9–11.]
(i) if f is in the domain of T , and dom(f ) is the
domain of f , then the function with domain

97. (338, 338, 425)
Frantz, M. (1998), ‘Two functions whose powers
make fractals’. American Mathematical
Monthly, volume 105, pages 609–617.
[p. 609. Lines 4 and 5.]
. . . Richard Darst and Gerald Taylor
investigated the diﬀerentiability of functions f p
(which for our purposes we will restrict to

517

contents

wordlist

Society, volume 318, pages 705–720.
[p. 715. Lines 7–6 from bottom.]
Let F be as stated and let A, B and C be
disjoint sets where A ∪ B ∪ C = I. . .

(0, 1)) deﬁned for each p ≥ 1 by
f (x) =

0

if x is irrational

1/np

index

if x = m/n with (m, n) = 1.

98. (396)
Frantz, M. (1998), ‘Two functions whose powers
make fractals’. American Mathematical
Monthly, volume 105, pages 609–617.
[p. 614. Formula (4).]
. . . if p > 1 and B is the set of numbers x that
are not dyadic rationals and satisfy
|x − m/2n | ≤ (2n )−p
for inﬁnitely many dyadic rationals m/2n ,
then. . .
99. (66, 101, 123, 147)
Freiling, C. (1990), ‘Symmetric derivates,
scattered, and semi-scattered sets’.
Transactions of the American Mathematical
Society, volume 318, pages 705–720.
[p. 705. Abstract.]
We call a set right scattered (left scattered) if
every nonempty subset contains a point isolated
on the right (left).

101. (380, 467)
Friedman, R. (1995), ‘Vector bundles and
SO(3)-invariants for elliptic surfaces’. Journal
of the American Mathematical Society, volume
8, pages 29–139.
[p. 29. Lines 4–6.]
Recall that a relatively minimal simply
connected elliptic surface S is speciﬁed up to
deformation type by its geometric genus pg (S)
and by two relatively prime integers m1 , m2 ,
the multiplicities of its multiple ﬁbers.
102. (319)
Furi, M. and M. Martelli (1991), ‘The teaching
of mathematics’. American Mathematical
Monthly, volume 98, pages 835–846.
[p. 842. Lines 17–20.]
By applying the Mean Value Theorem to f on
[a, d] and [d, b] respectively, we obtain

100. (137)
Freiling, C. (1990), ‘Symmetric derivates,
scattered, and semi-scattered sets’.
Transactions of the American Mathematical
518

f (d) − f (a) = f (c1 )(d − a),

c1 ∈ (a, d),

f (b) − f (d) = f (c2 )(b − d),

c1 ∈ (d, b).

contents

wordlist

103. (19)
Fulda, J. S. (1989), ‘Material implication
revisited’. American Mathematical Monthly,
volume 96, pages 247–250.
[p. 248. Third paragraph.]
It is the thesis of this paper that this uneasiness
is none other than the familiar temptation to
commit the fallacy of conversion
(p ⇒ q |− q ⇒ p), also known as the fallacy of
aﬃrming the consequence (p ⇒ q, q |− p) . . .
104. (53, 120)
Galvin, F. (1994), ‘A proof of Dilworth’s chain
decomposition theorem’. American
Mathematical Monthly, volume 101, pages
352–353.
[p. 352. Lines 1–2.]
105. (209, 425)
Gelbaum, B. R. and J. M. H. Olmsted (1990),
Theorems and Counterexamples in
Mathematics. Springer-Verlag.
[p. 65. Exercise 2.1.2.14.]
Show that for f in Exercise 2.1.1.13. 49, if g is
given by
x

def

g(x) =

0

f (t)dt

then: . . .
106. (319)
Gelbaum, B. R. and J. M. H. Olmsted (1990),
Theorems and Counterexamples in

index

Mathematics. Springer-Verlag.
[p. 85. Theorem 2.1.3.5..]
Let (2.1.3.3) obtain everywhere on a measurable
set E of positive measure. Then . . .
107. (27, 265)
Giblin, P. J. and S. A. Brassett (1985), ‘Local
symmetry of plane curves’. American
Mathematical Monthly, volume 92, pages
689–707.
[p. 691. Line 6 under the ﬁgure.]
Suppose we are given a smooth simple closed
plane curve and a point p on it. Is there always
a circle or straight line tangent to the curve at
p and at another point p = p?
108. (123, 124, 241)
Giesy, D. P. (1971), ‘The general solution of a
diﬀerential-functional equation’. American
Mathematical Monthly, volume 78, pages 37–42.
[p. 37. Lines 10–1.]
2Definition. A function g is of type (A) on I
if g has an antiderivative v on I and
g(a) = g(b) implies v(a) = v(b) for all a and b
in I
109. (216)
Gilmore, P. C. (1960), ‘An alternative to set
theory’. American Mathematical Monthly,
volume 67, pages 621–632.
[p. 622. Lines 5–3 from bottom.]

519

contents

wordlist

The nu relation between symbols is such that
the following sentences are true:
2 ν odd, 4 ν odd, 1 ν even, 3 ν even.

index

[X, Y ] = Z, and becomes especially clear if
drawn in a ﬂowbox for X.

113. (230, 324, 358, 397, 463)
Grassman, W. K. and J.-P. Tremblay (1996),
110. (94)
Graham, N., R. C. Entringer, and L. A. Szekely Logic and Discrete Mathematics: A Computer
(1994), ‘New tricks for old trees: Maps and the Science Perspective. Prentice-Hall.
[p. 105. Deﬁnition 2.7.]
pigeonhole principle’. American Mathematical
Monthly, volume 101, pages 664–667.
114. (34, 368)
[p. 665. Lines 4–3 from bottom.]
Grassman, W. K. and J.-P. Tremblay (1996),
Assume φ has no ﬁxed vertex. Then, for every
Logic and Discrete Mathematics: A Computer
vertex v, there is a unique non-trivial path in T
Science Perspective. Prentice-Hall.
from v to φ(v).
[p. 234. Deﬁnition 5.3.]
111. (198, 199)
115. (273)
Graham, R. L., D. E. Knuth, and O. Patashnik
Greenlaw, R. and H. J. Hoover (1998),
(1989), Concrete Mathematics.
Fundamentals of the Theory of Computation.
Addison-Wesley.
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, Inc.
[p. 71. Lines 15–13 from bottom.]
[p. 36. Footnote.]
Let f (x) be a continuous, monotonically
All logarithms in this text are base two unless
increasing function with the property that
noted otherwise. We use the now quite common
f (x) = integer ⇒ x = integer
notation lg x instead of log2 x.
(The symbol ‘⇒’ means “implies.”)
116. (82)
112. (63)
Grimaldi, R. P. (1999), Discrete and
Grayson, M., C. Pugh, and M. Shub (1994),
Combinatorial Mathematics, An Applied
‘Stably ergodic diﬀeomorphisms’. Annals of
Introduction, Fourth Edition. Addison-Wesley.
Mathematics, 2nd Ser., volume 140, pages
[p. 128. Example 3.2(a).]
295–329.
[p. 304. Lines 7–6 from bottom.]
This is the usual picture of the Lie bracket
520

contents

wordlist

117. (369)
Gross, K. L. (1978), ‘On the evolution of
noncommutative harmonic analysis’. American
Mathematical Monthly, volume 85, pages
525–548.
[p. 537. Lines 16–17.]
1. A connected compact abelian Lie group is
necessarily a torus, by which is meant a direct
product of circles.
118. (101)
Guckenheimer, J. and S. Johnson (1990),
‘Distortion of S-unimodal maps’. Annals of
Mathematics, 2nd Ser., volume 132, pages
71–130.
[p. 72. Lines 16–18.]
Our third result examines maps that have
“sensitive dependence to initial conditions”.
These are maps whose non-wandering set
contains an interval.
119. (216, 216)
Harris, M. (1993), ‘L-functions of 2 × 2 unitary
groups and factorization of periods of Hilbert
modular forms’. Journal of the American
Mathematical Society, volume 6, pages 637–719.
[p. 639. Lines 9–8 from bottom.]
Following the pattern ﬁrst observed by
Waldspurger, the vanishing of Θ(π, ω) to
GUH (D) either vanishes or equals π D , ω −1 ,
ˇ
...

index

120. (227)
Hardman, N. R. and J. H. Jordan (1967), ‘A
minimum problem connected with complete
residue systems in the Gaussian integers’.
American Mathematical Monthly, volume 74,
pages 559–561.
[p. 559. Lines 1–2.]
A Gaussian integer, γ, is a complex number
that can be expressed as γ = a + bi, where a
and b are real integers and i is the so-called
imaginary unit.
121. (117)
Hassell, C. and E. Rees (1993), ‘The index of a
constrained critical point’. American
Mathematical Monthly, volume 100, pages
772–778.
[p. 772. Lines 4–6.]
To ﬁnd the critical points of a smooth function
f deﬁned on M n ⊂ Rn+m , a smooth
submanifold given as the common zero-set of m
smooth functions gi : Rn+m → R.
122. (310)
Hathaway, A. S. (1887), ‘A memoir in the
theory of numbers’. American Journal of
Mathematics, volume 9, pages 162–179.
[p. 162. Lines 4–6.]
The labors of Gauss, Kummer, Dirichlet,
Kronecker, Dedekind, and others, have
extended the scope of the theory of numbers far

521

contents

wordlist

beyond its original limit of the science of the
natural numbers 0, ±1, ±2, ±3, . . . .
123. (329)
Haws, L. and T. Kiser (1995), ‘Exploring the
brachistochrone problem’. American
Mathematical Monthly, volume 102, pages
328–336.
[p. 333. Lines 10–9 from bottom.]
. . . to obtain the 2nd order diﬀerential
equation
1+ y

2

1 + µy + 2 (y − µx) y = 0.

index

[p. 2. Lines 11–14.]
The set A will be said to be a subset of the
set S if every element in A is an element of S,
that is, if a ∈ A implies that a ∈ S. We shall
write this as A ⊂ S . . . This notation is not
meant to preclude the possibility that A = S.
126. (94)
Hofmann, K. H. and C. Terp (1994), ‘Compact
subgroups of Lie groups and locally compact
groups’. Proceedings of the American
Mathematical Society, volume 120, pages
623–634.
[p. 630. Lines 19–18 from bottom.]
. . . and thus G0 /K0 is homeomorphic to a
euclidean space only if C = K0 .

124. (94, 94, 94, 150, 169)
Henriksen, M., S. Larson, J. Martinez, and
R. G. Woods (1994), ‘Lattice-ordered algebras
127. (64)
that are subdirect products of valuation
Holland, Jr., S. S. (1995), ‘Orthomodularity in
domains’. Transactions of the American
inﬁnite dimensions; a theorem of M. Sol`r’.
e
Mathematical Society, volume 345, pages
Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society
195–221.
(N.S.), volume 32, pages 205–234.
[p. 213. Lines 6–10 under Proposition 5.1.]
[p. 206. Lines 5–4 from the bottom.]
. . . QF (X) is an F -space if and only if:
⊥ ⊥⊥ = 0⊥ = E. But M + M ⊥ is
(*) If C1 , C2 are disjoint cozero sers, then there Thus (M + M )
closed, so M + M ⊥ = E.
are zero sets Z1 , Z2 such that C1 ⊆ Z1 ,
C2 ⊆ Z2 and int (Z1 ∩ Z2 ) = ∅.
128. (74)
Thus (*) is a suﬃcient but not necessary
Holland, Jr., S. S. (1995), ‘Orthomodularity in
condition for QF (X) to be an SV-space.
inﬁnite dimensions; a theorem of M. Sol`r’.
e
Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society
125. (141, 147)
(N.S.), volume 32, pages 205–234.
Herstein, I. N. (1964), Topics in Algebra.
[p. 222. line 10 from bottom.]
Blaisdell.
522

contents

wordlist

The set of those elements of L which are the
join of ﬁnitely many atoms is closed under the
operations ∨ and ∧ . . .
129. (86)
Howe, R. E. and E.-C. Tan (1993),
‘Homogeneous functions on light cones: the
inﬁnitesimal structure of some degenerate
principal series representations’. Bulletin of the
American Mathematical Society (N.S.), volume
28, pages 1–74.
[p. 8. Lines 7–9.]
Thus our computation of the action of p on
individual K-types is in principle (and will turn
out to be in practice) suﬃcient for
understanding the submodule structure of
S a (X 0 ).
130. (124, 216)
Ipsen, I. C. F. and C. D. Meyer (1995), ‘The
angle between complementary subspaces’.
American Mathematical Monthly, volume 102,
pages 904–911.
[p. 905. First lines.]
Deﬁnition 2.1. For nonzero subspaces
R, N ⊆ Rn , the minimal angle between R and
N is deﬁned to be the number 0 ≤ θ ≤ π/2 that
satisﬁes
cos θ =
max vT u
u∈R,v∈N
u 2 = v 2 =1

index

131. (198)
Jackson, D. (1934), ‘The convergence of Fourier
series’. American Mathematical Monthly,
volume 41, pages 67–84.
[p. 70. Lines 13–12 from bottom.]
It must be recognized however that the series
has not yet been proved to converge to the
value f (x).
132. (342)
Jackson, B. W. and D. Thoro (1990), Applied
Combinatorics with Problem Solving.
Addison-Wesley.
[p. 55. Deﬁnition of permutation.]
Let X be a set with n diﬀerent objects. An
arrangement of all the elements of X in a
sequence of length n is called a permutation.
133. (146)
Jackson, B. W. and D. Thoro (1990), Applied
Combinatorics with Problem Solving.
Addison-Wesley.
[p. 71. Problem 8.]
A small library contains 15 diﬀerent books. If
ﬁve diﬀerent students simultaneously check out
one book each, . . .
134. (113, 113)
Jankovic, D. and T. R. Hamlet (1990), ‘New
topologies from old via ideals’. American
Mathematical Monthly, volume 97, pages
295–310.

523

contents

wordlist

index

(2.6) using obvious inequalities produces

[p. 300. lines 17–14 from bottom.]
By taking I = J in the above theorem, the
following corollary answers the question about
the relationship between τ ∗ and τ ∗∗ .

(2.8)

x +y <2

xy + 1 (x + y)
2
1
1 + 2 (x + y)

Since 4xy ≤ (x + y)2 we see that
x + y < x + y. It follows that x(n) + y (n)
decreases in n and its limit is necessarily zero
indicating that 0 is globally stable.

135. (209)
Jenkyns, T. and E. Muller (2000), ‘Triangular
triples from ceilings to ﬂoors’. American
Mathematical Monthly, volume 107, pages
634–639.
[p. 634. Line 1.]
A triangular triple is a sequence of
non-negative integers (i, j, k) that gives the
lengths of the sides of a triangle.

138. (112)
Kang, M.-c. (1997), ‘Minimal polynomials over
cyclotomic ﬁelds’. American Mathematical
Monthly, volume 104, pages 260.
[p. 260. Lines 23–24.]
From the deﬁnition of T , we may interpret the
elements in T as those invertible elements in
Z/e Z that are of the form 1 + kd for some k
because . . .

136. (123)
Jones, R. and J. Pearce (2000), ‘A postmodern
view of fractions and the reciprocals of Fermat
primes’. Mathematics Magazine, volume 73,
pages 83–97.
[p. 95. Lines 16–17.]
Definition. A positive integer n > 1 is
perfectly symmetric if its reciprocal is
symmetric in any base b provided b ≡ 0
(mod n) and b ≡ 1 (mod n).
137. (184)
Karlin, S. (1972), ‘Some mathematical models
of population genetics’. American Mathematical
Monthly, volume 79, pages 699–739.
[p. 706. Lines 12–16.]
Under these conditions adding the relations in

139. (462)
Kaufman, R. (1974), ‘Sets of multiplicity and
diﬀerentiable functions. II’. Transactions of the
American Mathematical Society, volume 200,
pages 427–435.
[p. 429. Lines 8–10.]
Because sets of small Lebesgue measure have
small µk -measure, a proper choice of Y = ηk+1
enables us to obtain the necessary estimates.

524

contents

wordlist

140. (344)
Kendig, K. M. (1983), ‘Algebra, geometry, and
algebraic geometry: Some interconnections’.
American Mathematical Monthly, volume 90,
pages 161–174.
[p. 166. Fourth paragraph.]
Parametrize y = x2 by x = t, y = t2 , and plug
into Ax + By.
141.
Klambauer, G. (1978), ‘Integration by parts
and inverse functions’. American Mathematical
Monthly, volume 85, pages 668–669.
[p. 668. Line 1.]
Let f be a strictly increasing function with
continuous derivative on a compact interval
[a, b].
142.
Klebanoﬀ, A. and J. Rickert (1998), ‘Studying
the cantor dust at the edge of feigenbaum
diagrams’. The College Mathematics Journal,
volume 29, pages 189–198.
[p. 196. Second line below ﬁgure.]
The largest region leaves in one iteration and is
bounded by the curves
x1i =

1
+ (−1)i
2

which satisfy fa (x) = 1.

1 1
− ,
4 a

i = 1, 2

index

143.
Kleiner, I. (1999), ‘Field theory: From
equations to axiomatization’. American
Mathematical Monthly, volume 106, pages
677–684.
[p. 678. Lines 18–20.]
This says (in our terminology) that if E is the
splitting ﬁeld of a polynomial f (x) over a ﬁeld
F , then E = F (V ) for some rational function V
of the roots of f (x).
144. (124, 425)
Klosinski, L. F., G. L. Alexanderson, and L. C.
Larson (1993), ‘The ﬁfty-third William Lowell
Putnam Mathematical Competition’. American
Mathematical Monthly, volume 100, pages
755–767.
[p. 757. Problem A-2.]
Deﬁne C(α) to be the coeﬃcient of x1992 in the
power series expansion about x = 0 of (1 + x)α .
Evaluate . . .
145. (141)
Klosinski, L. F., G. L. Alexanderson, and L. C.
Larson (1993), ‘The ﬁfty-third William Lowell
Putnam Mathematical Competition’. American
Mathematical Monthly, volume 100, pages
755–767.
[p. 758. Problem B-1.]
Let S be a set of n distinct real numbers.

525

contents

wordlist

146. (134)
Knoebel, R. A. (1981), ‘Exponentials
reiterated’. American Mathematical Monthly,
volume 88, pages 235–252.
[p. 235. Lines 1–3.]
When is xy less than y x ?For what kind of
numbers does xy = y x ? And is there a formula
for y as a function of x?
147. (230, 407, 448)
Kolman, B., R. C. Busby, and S. Ross (1996),
Discrete Mathematical Structures, 3rd Edition.
Prentice-Hall.
[p. 109. Lines 15–11 from the bottom.]
148. (68)
Kolman, B., R. C. Busby, and S. Ross (1996),
Discrete Mathematical Structures, 3rd Edition.
Prentice-Hall.
[p. 111. Theorem 2.]
149. (124)
Konvalina, J. (2000), ‘A uniﬁed interpretation
of the binomial coeﬃcients, the Stirling
numbers, and the Gaussian coeﬃcients’.
American Mathematical Monthly, volume 107,
pages 901–910.
[p. 902. Lines 2–4.]
Deﬁne the binomial coeﬃcient of the ﬁrst kind
n
to be the number of k-element subsets
k
of S; that is, the number of ways to choose k

index

distinct objects from S with the order of
selection not important.
150. (109)
Kopperman, R. (1988), ‘All topologies come
from generalized metrics’. American
Mathematical Monthly, volume 95, pages 89–97.
[p. 93. Lines 9–11.]
If for each i ∈ I, Ai is a value semigroup
(together with +i , 0i , ∞i ), then so is their
product (with +, 0 deﬁned coordinatewise; 1/2
and inf are also taken coordinatewise.)
151. (58, 94, 147, 169, 238, 265, 294, 316, 365,
443)
Krantz, S. G. (1995), The Elements of
Advanced Mathematics. CRC Press.
[p. 40. Proposition 3.1.]
152. (156)
Krantz, S. G. (1995), The Elements of
Advanced Mathematics. CRC Press.
[p. 55. Line 18.]
153. (265, 388)
Krantz, S. G. (1995), The Elements of
Advanced Mathematics. CRC Press.
[p. 57. Deﬁnition 4.16.]
154. (38, 216, 369)
Kupka, J. and K. Prikry (1984), ‘The
measurability of uncountable unions’.
526

contents

wordlist

American Mathematical Monthly, volume 91,
pages 85–97.
[p. 86. Lines 5–6.]
Conversely, if an arbitrary function f : X → R
satisﬁes (1.6) and if the (ﬁnite Radon) measure
µ is complete, then f is A-measurable.

index

Corollary 13. No vector space V over an inﬁnite
ﬁeld F is a ﬁnite union of proper subspaces.
158. (216, 217)
Lefton, P. (1977), ‘Galois resolvents of
permutation groups’. American Mathematical
Monthly, volume 84, pages 642–644.
[p. 643. Lines 1–2.]
Definition. Let Φ(z, y) be the minimnal
polynomial for F (x) over Q(y). We call Φ(z, y)
the Galois resolvent of Π corresponding to
F (x).

155. (329)
Lam, C. W. H. (1991), ‘The search for a ﬁnite
projective plane of order 10’. American
Mathematical Monthly, volume 98, pages
305–318.
[p. 305. Lines 11–12.]
A ﬁnite projective plane of order n, with n > 0, 159. (209, 453)
is a collection of n2 + n + 1 lines and n2 + n + 1 Lenstra, Jr., H. W. (1992), ‘Algorithms in
algebraic number theory’. Bulletin of the
points such that . . .
American Mathematical Society (N.S.), volume
26, pages 211–244.
156. (483)
[p. 216. Lines 21–23.]
Lawlor, G. (1996), ‘A new minimization proof
Other algorithms may even give a nontrivial
for the brachistochrone’. American
factor of p, . . .
Mathematical Monthly, volume 103, pages
242–249.
160. (53, 66, 124, 169, 230)
[p. 243. Proposition 1.2.]
Lewis, H. R. and C. H. Papadimitriou (1998),
The velocity of a marble rolling without friction
Elements of the Theory of Computation, 2nd
down a ramp is proportional to |y|, if the
Edition. Prentice-Hall.
marble starts at rest at a point where y = 0.
[p. 20. Lines 11–10 from the bottom.]
157. (368)
Leep, D. B. and G. Myerson (1999), ‘Marriage, 161. (273)
Llewellyn, D. C., C. Tovey, and M. Trick
magic and solitaire’. American Mathematical
(1988), ‘Finding saddlepoints of two-person,
Monthly, volume 106, pages 419–429.
[p. 428. Corollary 13.]
527

contents

wordlist

zero sum games’. American Mathematical
Monthly, volume 95, pages 912–918.
[p. 913. Lines 19–18 from bottom.]
For ease of notation, we will denote log2 x by
lg x.
162. (62)
Loeb, P. A. (1991), ‘A note on Dixon’s proof of
Cauchy’s Integral Theorem’. American
Mathematical Monthly, volume 98, pages
242–244.
[p. 243. Lines 4–5.]
The trace of the curve γ in the complex plane is
denoted by {γ}.
163. (67)
Lorch, E. R. (1971), ‘Continuity and Baire
functions’. American Mathematical Monthly,
volume 78, pages 748–762.
[p. 753. Item (2) under III.]
There are three cases:
(1) E has ﬁnite cardinality.
(2) E has denumerable cardinality.
(3) E has the cardinality c of the continuum.
164. (66)
St. Luke (1949), ‘The Gospel according to St.
Luke’. In The Holy Bible, Authorized King
James Version, pages 55–89. Collins
Clear-Type Press.
[p. 56. Chapter 1, verse 48.]

index

165. (448)
Mac Lane, S. (1971), Categories for the
Working Mathematician. Springer-Verlag.
[p. 58. Line 15.]
Thus a universal element r, e for H is exactly
a universal arrow from ∗ to H.
166. (308)
MacEachern, S. N. and L. M. Berliner (1993),
‘Aperiodic chaotic orbit’. American
Mathematical Monthly, volume 100, pages
237–241.
[p. 237. Lines 12–16.]
For ease of exposition, the presentation here is
specialized to a familiar example for J = [0, 1],
namely the tent map deﬁned by the function
f (x) = 2x
2 − 2x

0 ≤ x < .5
.5 ≤ x ≤ 1

167. (308)
MacEachern, S. N. and L. M. Berliner (1993),
‘Aperiodic chaotic orbit’. American
Mathematical Monthly, volume 100, pages
237–241.
[p. 241. Lines 13–11 from bottom.]
For any y ∈ S1 , witn y = 1, there are exactly
two values of z (namely z = y/2 or 1 − y/2) for
which σ (tz ) = ty .

528

contents

wordlist

168. (52, 237, 325, 462)
Mac Lane, S. and G. Birkhoﬀ (1993), Algebra,
third edition. Chelsea.
[p. 43. Lines 5–12.]
A group is a set G together with a binary
operation G × G → G, written (a, b) → ab, such
that: . . . In other words, a group is a monoid in
which every element is invertible.

index

described above not only ﬁxes a and b, but also
ﬁxes all points collinear with a and b.
172. (69)
Martelli, M., M. Deng, and T. Seph (1998),
‘Deﬁning chaos’. Mathematics Magazine,
volume 72, pages 112–122.
[p. 116. Example 3.1.]
Let f : [0, 1] → [0, 1] be deﬁned by

169. (467)
Mac Lane, S. and G. Birkhoﬀ (1993), Algebra,
third edition. Chelsea.
[p. 182. Lines 4–3 from the bottom.]
Therefore these identities characterize the
biproduct A1 ⊕ A2 up to isomorphism . . .

f (x) =

x + .5 0 ≤ x ≤ .5
0

.5 ≤ x ≤ 1.

173. (46, 238)
Mauldon, J. G. (1978), ‘Num, a variant of Nim
with no ﬁrst-player win’. American
170. (66, 141)
Mathematical Monthly, volume 85, pages
Marchisotto, E. A. (1992), ‘Lines without
575–578.
order’. American Mathematical Monthly,
[p. 575. Lines 3–5.]
volume 99, pages 738–745.
These constraints are such that, if one player
[p. 739. Lines 23–25.]
could in his turn leave (say) n matchsticks in a
Given two distinct points a and b, the class of
all points p such that there exists a motion that particular heap, then the other player could
leaves a ﬁxed and transforms p into b is called a not. In particular, at most one of the players is
entitled to clear any particular heap.
sphere of center a and passing through b.
171. (183)
Marchisotto, E. A. (1992), ‘Lines without
order’. American Mathematical Monthly,
volume 99, pages 738–745.
[p. 741. Lines 2–4.]
Notice that the rotation in Euclidean space

174. (458)
Maxson, C. J. (1003), ‘Near-rings of invariants.
II’. Proceedings of the American Mathematical
Society, volume 117, pages 27–35.
[p. 27. Line 4.]
Under function addition, (M, +) is a group.
529

contents

wordlist

175. (228)
Mazur, B. (1993), ‘On the passage from local to
global in number theory’. Bulletin of the
American Mathematical Society (N.S.), volume
29, pages 14–50.
[p. 29. Lines 8–6 from the bottom.]
From now on we assume n to be good, and we
will freely identify elements of H 1 (GK , E[n])
with the ∆n -equivariant homomorphisms
GM → E[n] to which they give rise.
176. (217, 344, 389)
McColm, G. L. (1989), ‘Some restrictions on
simple ﬁxed points of the integers’. Journal of
Symbolic Logic, volume 54, pages 1324–1345.
[p. 1328. Lines 10–13.]
Simultaneously, we deﬁne the evaluation
function

[p. 187. First sentence of ﬁfth paragraph.]
We use Polish notation (sometimes with added
parentheses for clarity) to denote the terms
build up from function symbols and variables of
a ﬁrst order language.
178. (32, 99, 169, 217, 425)
Mead, D. G. (1993), ‘Generators for the algebra
of symmetric polynomials’. American
Mathematical Monthly, volume 100, pages
386–388.
[p. 387. Lines 12–16.]
Consider the monomial symmetric function
a1 , a2 , . . . , ak in Q[x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ] and let
t = Σk ai . Then there is a positive rational
i=1
number c and an element B in
Q[p1 , p2 , . . . , pi−1 ] such that
a1 , a2 , . . . , ak = (−1)k1 cpi + B.

ev : terms × assignments → values
so that if θ is a term and x is an assignment of
elements from ω and perhaps partial functions
on ω, then ev(θ, x) is the result of plugging x
into θ.
177. (349)
Mckenzie, R. (1975), ‘On spectra, and the
negative solution of the decision problem for
identities having a ﬁnite nontrivial model’.
Journal of Symbolic Logic, volume 40, pages
186–196.

index

179. (99, 199, 200, 327, 369, 397)
Mollin, R. A. (1997), ‘Prime-producing
quadratics’. American Mathematical Monthly,
volume 104, pages 529–544.
[p. 531. Deﬁnition 2.1.]
Consider F (x) = ax2 + bx + c (a, b, c ∈ Z),
a = 0, and suppose |F (x)| is prime for all
integers = 0, 1, . . . , l − 1. If l ∈ N is the
smallest value such that |F (l)| is composite,
|F (l)| = 1, or |F (l)| = |F (x)| for some
530

contents

wordlist

x = 0, 1, . . . , l − 1, then F (x) is said to have
prime-production length l.
180. (216, 228)
Morgan, J. W. (1992), ‘λ-trees and their
applications’. Bulletin of the American
Mathematical Society (N.S.), volume , pages
87–112.
[p. 91. Lines 10–6 from the bottom.]
We form the topological space X(Γ) by
beginning with the disjoint union

[Check that the repeate coproduct
symbol is correct]
Xv
v∈V

Xe × I,
e∈E

and (a) identifying Xe × I with Xe × I via
(x, t) ⇔ (x, 1 − t) and (b) gluing Xe × {0} to
Xi(e) via the given inclusion.
181. (256)
Morgan, F. (1988), ‘Area-minimizing surfaces,
faces of Grassmannians, and calibrations’.
American Mathematical Monthly, volume 95,
pages 813–822.
[p. 814. Lines 2–5 below ﬁrst ﬁgure.]
The coordinates of the line at angle θ to the
x-axis are the oriented projections of a unit
length from that line onto the axes, namely
(cos θ, sin θ). Hence G(1, R2 ) is just the unit
circle in R2 .

index

182. (198)
Morrison, K. E. (1995), ‘Cosine products,
Fourier transforms, and random sums’.
American Mathematical Monthly, volume 102,
pages 716–724.
[p. 716. Line 1.]
The function sin x/x is endlessly fascinating.
183. (38)
Mornhinweg, D., D. B. Shapiro, and K. G.
Valente (1993), ‘The principal axis theorem
over arbitrary ﬁelds’. American Mathematical
Monthly, volume 100, pages 749–754.
[p. 749. Title of Article.]
The Principal Axis Theorem Over Arbitrary
Fields
184. (185, 462)
Mornhinweg, D., D. B. Shapiro, and K. G.
Valente (1993), ‘The principal axis theorem
over arbitrary ﬁelds’. American Mathematical
Monthly, volume 100, pages 749–754.
[p. 751. Theorem 2.]
Let F be a formally real pythagorean ﬁeld. The
following are equivalent:
(i) F has the Principal Axis Property,
(ii) Every symmetric matrix over F is
diagonalizable over F , and
(iii) Every symmetric matrix over F has an
eigenvalue in F .

531

contents

wordlist

185. (158)
Neidinger, R. D. and R. J. Annen III (1996),
‘The road to chaos is ﬁlled with polynomial
curves’. American Mathematical Monthly,
volume 103, pages 640–653.
[p. 642. Lines 15–23.]
Superattracting Root Theorem. Let n ∈ N.
The parameter r satisﬁes Qn (r) = 0 and
Qj (r) = 0 for 0 < j < n if and only if iteration
of fr (x) has a superattracting periodic point of
period n.
186. (308)
Nevo, A. (1994), ‘Harmonic analysis and
pointwise ergodic theorems for noncommuting
transformations’. Journal of the American
Mathematical Society, volume 7, pages 875–902.
[p. 875. Lines 10–11.]
Let (X, B, m) be a standard Lebesgue measure
space, namely a measure space whose σ-algebra
is countably generated and countably separate.
187. (179, 216)
Newns, W. F. (1967), ‘Functional dependence’.
American Mathematical Monthly, volume 74,
pages 911–920.
[p. 911. Lines 13–12 from bottom.]
Let X, I be sets, (Yι )ι∈I a family of sets, and
for each ι ∈ I let fι : X → Yι .
188. (310)
Newcomb, S. (1881), ‘Note on the frequency of

index

use of the diﬀerent digits in natural numbers’.
American Journal of Mathematics, volume 4,
pages 39–40.
[p. 39. Lines 8–10, lines 2–1 from the bottom,
and lines 1–2 on page 40.]
The question we have to consider is, what is the
probability that if a natural number be taken
at random its ﬁrst signiﬁcant digit will be n, its
second n , etc. . . .
Our problem is thus reduced to the following:
We have a series of numbers between 1 and i,
...
189. (470)
Newns, W. F. (1967), ‘Functional dependence’.
American Mathematical Monthly, volume 74,
pages 911–920.
[p. 912. Lines 3–4.]
The support of F is the smallest closed set
outside which F vanishes identically.
190. (82, 113, 113, 199, 388, 397)
Niven, I. (1956), Irrational Numbers.
Mathematical Association of America.
[p. 41. Corollary 3.12.]
If θ is rational in degrees, say θ = 2πr for some
rational number r, then the only rational values
of the trigonometric functions of θ are as
follows: sin θ, cos θ = 0, ± 1 , ±1;
2
sec θ, csc θ = ±1, ±2; tan θ, cot θ = 0, ±1.

532

contents

wordlist

index

[p. 18. Lines 9–7 from bottom.]
191. (78, 462)
The isoperimetric inequality (36) gives
Niven, I. (1956), Irrational Numbers.
Mathematical Association of America.
L2 ≥ 4πA + α2 A2 > α2 A2
[p. 83. Lemma 7.1.]
Any r + 1 linear forms in r indeterminates with for simply connected domains with K ≤ −α2 ,
rational coeﬃcients are linearly dependent over so that (77) holds in that case.
the rationals.
195. (217, 217, 462)
192. (68, 82, 199, 217)
Ostrowski, A. M. (1971), ‘Some properties of
Osofsky, B. L. (1994), ‘Noether Lasker primary reduced polynomial equations’. SIAM Journal
decomposition revisited’. American
on Numerical Analysis, volume 8, pages
Mathematical Monthly, volume 101, pages
623–638.
759–768.
[p. 624. Lines 14–16.]
[p. 760. Lines 14–16.]
Taking x = 2 in (6), we obtain
With this convention on sides, the deﬁning
ψn (2) = 1 + 2n−1 , so that
property of a module homomorphism
(7)
ρn < 2 (n ≥ 2)
φ : M → N is that
(r · x + x · y)φ = r · (x)φs · (y)φ for all x, y ∈ M and we see that all roots of a reduced equation
and r, s ∈ R.
lie in the disk |z| < 2.
193. (40)
Osserman, R. (1979), ‘Bonnesen-style
isoperimetric inequalities’. American
Mathematical Monthly, volume 86, pages 1–29.
[p. 5. Line 10.]
Before proceeding further with the argument,
let us prove (27).
194. (216)
Osserman, R. (1979), ‘Bonnesen-style
isoperimetric inequalities’. American
Mathematical Monthly, volume 86, pages 1–29.

196. (137, 179, 199)
Oxtoby, J. C. (1977), ‘Diameters of arcs and the
gerrymandering problem’. American
Mathematical Monthly, volume 84, pages
155–162.
[p. 155. Lines 24–25.]
For what values of c (if any) is it true that for
every ﬁnite family of disjoint ﬁnite sets Fj with
diam Fj > 0 there exist disjoint polygonal arcs
Ai such that Fj ⊆ Ai and diam Ai ≤ c diam Fj
for all j?
533

contents

wordlist

197. (232, 393)
Pincus, J. D. (1964), ‘On the spectral theory of
singular integral operators’. Transactions of the
American Mathematical Society, volume 113,
pages 101–128.
[p. 108. Lines 1–4.]
Therefore, we may deduce that
F (ξ, z) =
exp

1
2πi

T (ξ, z) − S(ξ, z)
(S(ξ, z)T (ξ, z))
b
a

·

A(µ) − ξ − k(µ) dµ
A(µ) − ξ + k(µ) µ − z

log

and it is now clear that the roots of F (ξ, z) are
the roots of the function
W (ξ, z) =

T (ξ, z) − S(ξ, z)
(S(ξ, z)T (ξ, z))

.

198. (367)
P´lya, G. (1965), Mathematical Discovery,
o
Volume II. John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
[p. 7. Lines 19–23.]
. . . from the last equation of sect. 7.4 we obtain
x=

ah
b−a

Then we substitute this value for x in the two
foregoing equations of sect 7.4, obtaining. . .
199.
Pomerance, C. (1996), ‘A tale of two sieves’.
Notices of the American Mathematical Society,

index

volume 43, pages 1473–1485.
[p. 1482. Last sentence of second column.]
This discrepancy was due to fewer computers
being used on the project and some “down
time” while code for the ﬁnal stages of the
algorithm was being written.
200. (313)
Pomerance, C. (1996), ‘A tale of two sieves’.
Notices of the American Mathematical Society,
volume 43, pages 1473–1485.
[p. 1478. Lines 17–15 from the bottom of ﬁrst
column.]
If n is not a square modulo p, then Q(x) is
never divisible by p and no further
computations with p need be done.
201. (106, 227)
Poor, H. V. (2000), ‘Modulation and detection’.
In [Dorf, 2000] , page 4 of Chapter 126. PDF
ﬁles available at http://www.engnetbase.com.
[p. 4. Line 5.]
. . . where j denotes the imaginary unit.
202. (26, 132)
Powers, R. T. (1974), ‘Selfadjoint algebras of
unbounded operator. II’. Transactions of the
American Mathematical Society, volume 187,
pages 261–293.
[p. 264. Line 5.]
All algebras in this section will have a unit
denoted by 1.

534

contents

wordlist

203. (80, 198, 199, 339, 355, 425, 462)
Powers, V. (1996), ‘Hilbert’s 17th problem and
the champagne problem’. American
Mathematical Monthly, volume 103, pages
879–887.
[p. 879. Lines 1–4 and 20–21.]
About 15 years ago, E. Becker gave a talk in
which he proved that

index
2

complement W x , and a predicate is recursive
just in case it and its complement are both r.e.

205. (62, 132, 379, 463)
Rabinowitz, S. and P. Gilbert (1993), ‘A
nonlinear recurrence yielding binary digits’.
Mathematics Magazine, volume 64, pages
168–171.
[p. 168. Lines 10 and 3–1 from bottom.]
Let {x} denote the fractional part of x, that is,
1 + t2
B(t) :=
∈ Q(t))
{x} = x − x .
2 + t2
is a sum of 2n-th powers of elements in Q(t) for . . . 2. If k is an integer, a is a real number in
the range 1 < a < 2, and x = k/(a − 1), then
all n.
a
. . . A rational function
a x +
= ax
2
f ∈ R(X) := R(x1 , . . . , xk ) is positive
semi-deﬁnite (psd) if f ≥ 0 at every point in Rk
206. (129)
for which it is deﬁned.
Ranum, D. L. (1995), ‘On some applications of
204. (256, 257)
Fibonacci numbers’. American Mathematical
Putnam, H. (1973), ‘Recursive functions and
Monthly, volume 102, pages 640–645.
hierarchies’. American Mathematical Monthly,
[p. 641. Lines 6–7 under Figure 2.]
volume 80, pages 68–86.
At the other extreme, Figure 3 shows a worst
[p. 82. Lines 1–6.]
case degenerate tree where each node has only
If we adjoin to the above condition the further 1 child except for the single leaf. [The trees
clause:
here are binary trees.]
(Ex)(y)(z) (J(y, z) ∈ Wx ≡ J(y, z) ∈ Wi )
/

207. (217)
Reed, G. M. (1986), ‘The intersection topology
then the deﬁnition becomes a deﬁnition of the
w.r.t. the real line and the countable ordinals’.
class of recursive well-orderings (or, rather, of
the corresponding set of indices), for this clause ransactions of the American Mathematical
Society, volume 297, pages 509–520.
just says that the predicate Wi2 has an r.e.
535

contents

wordlist

index

[p. 509. Lines 1–2.]
If Υ1 and Υ2 are topologies deﬁned on the set
X, then Υ is the intersection topology w.r.t. Υ1
and Υ2 deﬁned on X, where
{U1 ∩ U2 | U1 ∈ Υ1 and U2 ∈ Υ2 } is a basis for
Υ.

The theorem is the following: the set of all
sums of rearrangements of a given series of
complex numbers is the empty set, a single
point, a line in the complex plane, or the whole
complex plane.

209. (117)
Richmond, B. and T. Richmond (1993), ‘The
equal area zones property’. American
Mathematical Monthly, volume 100, pages
475–477.
[p. 475. Lines 7–8 below the ﬁgure.]
To state the problem precisely, suppose that
y = g(x) is a piecewise smooth nonnegative
curve deﬁned over [a, b], and is revolved around
the x-axis.

213. (158, 241, 483)
Rosen, K. (1993), Elementary Number Theory
and its Applications. Addison-Wesley.
[p. 223. Theorem 6.10..]

211. (94, 370)
Rosen, K. (1991), Discrete Mathematics and its
208. (53, 453)
Ribet, K. A. (1995), ‘Galois representations and Applications, Second Edition. McGraw-Hill.
[p. 6. Deﬁnition 5.]
modular forms’. Bulletin of the American
Mathematical Society (N.S.), volume 32, pages
212. (94, 158, 241)
375–402.
Rosen, K. (1993), Elementary Number Theory
[p. 391. Lines 12–13.]
and its Applications. Addison-Wesley.
Suppose that there is a non-trivial solution to
[p. 208. Theorems 6.2 and 6.3.]
Fermat’s equation X + Y = Z .

210. (150)
Rosenthal, P. (1987), ‘The remarkable theorem
of Levy and Steinitz’. American Mathematical
Monthly, volume 94, pages 342–351.
[p. 342. Lines 9–11.]

214. (304)
Rosen, K. (1993), Elementary Number Theory
and its Applications. Addison-Wesley.
[p. 224. Theorem 6.11.]
215. (58, 169, 388)
Rosen, K. (1993), Elementary Number Theory
and its Applications. Addison-Wesley.
[p. 293. Lines 6–8.]

536

contents

wordlist

216. (78, 329)
Rosen, M. (1995), ‘Niels Hendrik Abel and
equations of the ﬁfth degree’. American
Mathematical Monthly, volume 102, pages
495–505.
[p. 504. Proposition 3.]

index

220. (91)
Rubel, L. A. (1989), ‘The Editor’s corner:
Summability theory: A neglected tool of
analysis’. American Mathematical Monthly,
volume 96, pages 421–423.
[p. 421. Lines 9–8 from bottom.]
We are now in a position to give a conceptual
proof of Pringsheim’s theorem . . .

217. (280)
Ross, K. A. and C. R. B. Wright (1992),
Discrete Mathematics, 3rd Edition.
Prentice-Hall.
[p. 19. Lines 3–2 from bottom.]
We sometimes refer to a function as a map or
mapping and say that f maps S into T .
218. (179)
Rota, G.-C. (1997), ‘The many lives of lattice
theory’. Notices of the American Mathematical
Society, volume 44, pages 1440–1445.
[p. 1440. .]
The family of all partitions of a set (also called
equivalence relations) is a lattice when
partitions are ordered by reﬁnement.
219. (129)
Roth, B. (1981), ‘Rigid and ﬂexible
frameworks’. American Mathematical Monthly,
volume 88, pages 6–21.
[p. 12. First two lines of Example 4.2.]
Consider the degenerate triangle G(p) in R2
shown in Fig. 4 with collinear vertices . . .

221. (147, 329)
Senechal, M. (1990), ‘Finding the ﬁnite groups
of symmetries of the sphere’. American
Mathematical Monthly, volume 97, pages
329–335.
[p. 330. Lines 5–6 of Section 3.]
Let H be a ﬁnite subgroup of S0(3) of order n.
To each element of H (other than the identity)
there corresponds an axis that intersects the
sphere in two points.
222. (256)
Shpilrain, V. (1995), ‘On the rank of an element
of a free Lie algebra’. Proceedings of the
American Mathematical Society, volume 123,
pages 1303–1307.
[p. 1303. Lines 6–5 from bottom.]
If we have an element u of the free Lie algebra
L and write u = u(x1 , . . . , xn ), this just means
that no generators xi with i > n are involved in
u.

537

contents

wordlist

223. (349, 390)
Singmaster, D. (1978), ‘An elementary
evaluation of the Catalan numbers’. American
Mathematical Monthly, volume 85, pages
366–368.
[p. 366. Line 15–14 from the bottom.]
For example, when n = 2, the products above
have the Polish form XXabc and XaXbc and
the reverse Polish forms abXcX and abcXX.

. . . we let B (x, ξ) = m Pm (x, ξ) and notice
that we can factor the symbol of the operator
in (1.5) as follows
Pm (x, ξ) − τ m =
(B (x, ξ) − τ )· B m−1 + B m−2 τ + · · · + τ m−1

224. (176, 216)
Snyder, W. M. (1982), ‘Factoring repunits’.
American Mathematical Monthly, volume 89,
pages 462–466.
[p. 463. Lines 11–14.]
We factor Φn (b) in the ring of algebraic integers
of Qn = Q(ζ). Then
n

Φn (b) =

(b − ζ a )

(1)

a=1

(a,n)=1

We now claim that if A is the ideal in R
generated by two distinct factors ζ − aa1 and
ζ − aa2 given in (1), then . . .

index

The second factor is uniformly elliptic in the
sense that it is bounded below by a multiple of
|ξ|m−1 + τ m−1 , while the ﬁrst factor vanishes
for certain |ξ| ≈ τ .
226. (34, 230)
Solow, D. (1995), The Keys to Advanced
Mathematics: Recurrent Themes in Abstract
Reasoning. BookMasters Distribution Center.
[p. 144. Deﬁnition 3.3.]
A set is a strict subset of a set B, written
A ⊂ B, if and only if A ⊆ B and A = B.
227. (217, 217)
Srinivasan, B. (1981), ‘Characters of ﬁnite
groups: Some uses and mathematical
applications’. American Mathematical Monthly,
volume 88, pages 639–646.
[p. 640. Line 7.]
The function χ : g → Trace (ρ(g)) of G into C is
called the character of ρ.

225. (176, 217)
Sogge, C. D. (1989), ‘Oscillatory integrals and
unique continuation for second order elliptic
diﬀerential equations’. Journal of the American 228. (62, 130)
Mathematical Society, volume 2, pages 491–515. Starke, E. P., editor (1970a), ‘Problems and
[p. 494. Lines 2–6.]
solutions’. American Mathematical Monthly,
538

contents

wordlist

volume 77, pages 765–783.
[p. 774. Problem 5746.]
a
S(a) = Σx,y,z e x + y + z +
yz + zx + xy
229. (130, 414)
Starke, E. P., editor (1970b), ‘Problems and
solutions’. American Mathematical Monthly,
volume 77, pages 882–897.
[p. 884. Problem E 2198.]
If r > 1 is an integer and x is real, deﬁne
r−1
f (x) = Σ∞ Σj=1
k=0

x + jrk
,
rk+1

where the brackets denote the greatest integer
function.
230. (134, 144)
Stolarsky, K. B. (1995), ‘Searching for common
generalizations: The case of hyperbolic
functions’. American Mathematical Monthly,
volume 102, pages 609–619.
[p. 614. Lines 17–11 from bottom.]
Theorem. If y1 = y1 (x) and y2 = y2 (x) are
functions satisfying 0 ≤ y1 (0) < y2 (0) and the
diﬀerential equations
dy1
α
= Cy2 ,
dx

dy2
α
= Cy1
dx

index

where C > 0, then for some constant c0

 0 α>0
y2 (x) − y1 (x) →
c α=0
 0
∞ α<0

(4.5)

as x increases without limit in the (possibly
inﬁnite) domain of deﬁnition of y1 (x) and
y2 (x).
231. (325)
Stolarsky, K. B. (1995), ‘Searching for common
generalizations: The case of hyperbolic
functions’. American Mathematical Monthly,
volume 102, pages 609–619.
[p. 619. Lines 9–13.]
. . . then any inequality
f (x1 , . . . , xn ) ≥ 0,
where the function F is formed by any ﬁnite
number of rational operations and real
exponentiations, is decidably true or false!

232. (94)
Strang, G. (1989), ‘Patterns in linear algebra’.
American Mathematical Monthly, volume 96,
pages 105–117.
[p. 107. Lines 15–16.]
Certainly the expression
T
2
2
(4.4) e Ce = c1 e1 + · · · + c4 e4 is not negative. It is
zero only if e = Ax = 0.

539

contents

wordlist

233. (34, 66, 132, 372)
Straight, H. J. (1993), Combinatorics: An
Invitation. Brooks/Cole.
[p. 3. Deﬁnition 0.1.1.]
234. (38)
Straight, H. J. (1993), Combinatorics: An
Invitation. Brooks/Cole.
[p. 7. Line 9 from the bottom.]
235. (209, 459)
Straight, H. J. (1993), Combinatorics: An
Invitation. Brooks/Cole.
[p. 17. Deﬁnition 0.2.1.]

index

n → ∞, where qn is the least prime factor of n.
239. (216, 216, 217)
Steve Surace, J. (1990), ‘The Schr¨dinger
o
equation with a quasi-periodic potential’.
Transactions of the American Mathematical
Society, volume 320, pages 321–370.
[p. 321. Abstract.]
We consider the Schr¨dinger equation
o
−

d2
ψ + (cos x + cos (αx + ϑ)) ψ = Eψ
dx2

where . . .

237. (81)
Straight, H. J. (1993), Combinatorics: An
Invitation. Brooks/Cole.
[p. 119. Line 7 from bottom.]

240. (217, 217, 217)
Talagrand, M. (1986), ‘Derivations, LΨ -bounded
martingales and covering conditions’.
Transactions of the American Mathematical
Society, volume 293, pages 257–291.
[p. 257. Abstract.]
Let (Ω, Σ, P ) be a complete probability space.
Let (Σj )j∈J be a directed family of
sub-σ-algebras of Σ. Let (Φ, Ψ) be a pair of
conjugate Young functions.

238. (176)
Suryanarayana, D. (1977), ‘On a class of
sequences of integers’. American Mathematical
Monthly, volume 84, pages 728–730.
[p. 728. Lines 14–15.]
Let {an } be an increasing sequence of positive
integers such that log an /qn log qn → 0 as

241. (110)
Talagrand, M. (1990), ‘The three-space problem
for L1 ’. Journal of the American Mathematical
Society, volume 3, pages 9–29.
[p. 9. Lines 9–8 from bottom.]
For simplicity, let us say that a Banach space
contains a copy of L1 if it contains a subspace

236. (342)
Straight, H. J. (1993), Combinatorics: An
Invitation. Brooks/Cole.
[p. 27. Deﬁnition 0.2.4.]

540

contents

wordlist

isomorphic to L1 .
242. (18)
Teitelbaum, J. T. (1991), ‘The Poisson kernel
for Drinfeld modular curves’. Journal of the
American Mathematical Society, volume 4,
pages 491–511.
[p. 494. Lines 1–4.]
. . . may ﬁnd a homeomorphism x : E → P1
k
such that
ax(u) + b
x(γu) =
.
cx(u) + d
We will tend to abuse notation and identify E
with P1 by means of the function x.
k
243. (344)
Temple, B. and C. A. Tracy (1992), ‘From
Newton to Einstein’. American Mathematical
Monthly, volume 99, pages 507–521.
[p. 518. Line before (4.11).]
Plugging in we obtain:
244. (130, 414)
Tews, M. C. (1970), ‘A continuous almost
periodic function has every chord’. American
Mathematical Monthly, volume 77, pages
729–731.
[p. 730. Third line from the bottom.]
sin

2π
a

a
+t
4

− sin

2π a
·
a 4

< sin

2π
p
a

index

245. (144)
Thielman, H. P. (1953), ‘On the deﬁnition of
functions’. American Mathematical Monthly,
volume 60, pages 259–262.
[p. 260. Lines 16–14 from bottom.]
A function f whose domain of deﬁnition is X,
and whose range is Y is frequently denoted by
f : X → Y , and is referred to as a function on
X onto Y .
246. (425)
Tits, J. (1964), ‘Algebraic and abstract simple
groups’. The Annals of Mathematics, 2nd Ser.,
volume 80, pages 313–329.
[p. 321. Lines 25–29.]
. . . (the symbols A2 , A3 , · · · , G2 have their
usual meaning, and the left superscript denotes
˜
˜
the degree of k/k when k = k, i.e, when G does
not split over k)
if k = F2 , groups of type A2 , 2A3 , 2A4 , B3
and 3D4 ;
if k = F3 , groups of type A2 , 2A2 , 2A3 , B2
and 3D4 and G2 .
247. (261)
van Lint, J. H. and R. M. Wilson (1992), A
Course in Combinatorics. Cambridge
University Press.
[p. 35. Lines 8–4 from bottom.]
. . . We shall show that a larger matching
exists. (We mean larger in cardinality; we may
541

contents

wordlist

not be able to ﬁnd a complete matching
containing these particular m edges.)
248. (30, 94, 462)
Van Douwen, E. K., D. J. Lutzer, and T. C.
Przymusi´ski (1977), ‘Some extensions of the
n
Tietze-Urysohn Theorem’. American
Mathematical Monthly, volume 84, pages 435.
[p. 435. Theorem A.]
If A is a closed subspace of the normal space X
then there is a function η : C ∗ (A) → C ∗ (A)
such that for every f ∈ C ∗ (A), η(F ) extends F
and has the same bounds as F .
249.
Vaught, R. L. (1973), ‘Some aspects of the
theory of models’. American Mathematical
Monthly, volume 80, pages 3–37.
[p. 3. Lines 6–10.]
For example, each of the properties of being a
group, an Abelian group, or a torsion-free
Abelian group os expressible in the so-called
elementary language (or ﬁrst-order predicate
calculus). Thus, instead of saying that the
group mathcalG is Abelian, we can sat it is a
model of the elementary sentence
∀x∀y(x ◦ y = y ◦ x). Such properties are also
called elementary.

index

Analysis, volume 28, pages 496–511.
[p. 501. Lines 1–2 under formula (21 ).]
This may be written as
7

bi aij
j=4

i

·
k

ajk cq
k

−

cq+1
j
q+1

=0

by invoking (15) to imply that the ﬁrst bracket
is zero for j = 2, 3. Since the second bracket is
zero for 4 ≤ j ≤ 6 by (17 ), and . . .
251. (63)
Wallach, N. R. (1993), ‘Invariant diﬀerential
operators on a reductive Lie algebra and Weyl
group representations’. Journal of the
American Mathematical Society, volume 6,
pages 779–816.
[p. 786. Lines 8–7 from bottom.]
If f, g ∈ P(V0 × V0∗ ) then let {f, g} (the Poisson
bracket of f and g) be as in Appendix 1.
252. (214)
Wilf, H. S. (1989), ‘The editor’s corner: The
white screen problem’. American Mathematical
Monthly, volume 96, pages 704–707.
[p. 704. Lines 11–8 from bottom.]
To translate the question into more precise
mathematical language, we consider a grid of
M N lattice points

250. (63)
Verner, J. H. (1991), ‘Some Runge-Kutta
formula pairs’. SIAM Journal on Numerical

G = {(i, j) | 0 ≤ i ≤ M − 1; 0 ≤ j ≤ N − 1}

542

contents

wordlist

and we regard them as being the vertices of a
graph.

index

256. (319)
Zabell, S. L. (1995), ‘Alan Turing and the
Central Limit Theorem’. American
253. (94, 217)
Mathematical Monthly, volume 102, pages
Witte, D. (1990), ‘Topological equivalence of
483–494.
foliations of homogeneous spaces’. Transactions
[p. 486. Lines 4–6.]
of the American Mathematical Society, volume
Feller (1937) showed that if normal convergence
317, pages 143–166.
occurs (that is, condition (2.2) holds), but
[p. 144. Lines 16–13 from bottom.]
condition (2.4) also obtains, then
˜
By composing f with the inverse of σ, we may
1 Xmk
˜
assume the restriction of f to Zn is the identity.
⇒ (0, 1) .
ρ snk
Because
(**)R/Z is compact,
˜
257. (39)
this implies that f moves points by a bounded
Zalcman, L. (1975), ‘A heuristic principle in
amount . . .
complex function theory’. American
254. (354, 358)
Mathematical Monthly, volume 82, pages
Yetter, D. N. (1990), ‘Quantales and
813–818.
(noncommutative) linear logic’. Journal of
[p. 813. Lines 4–3 from the bottom.]
Symbolic Logic, volume 55, pages 41–64.
Here f is the spherical derivative of the
[p. 44. Lines 14–13 from bottom.]
function; the present notation . . . is better
In our formalism we adopt preﬁx notation in
adapted for displaying the argument of the
preference to the inﬁx/postﬁx notation used by function explicitly.
Girard . . .
258. (238)
255. (338)
Zalcman, L. (1980), ‘Oﬀbeat integral geometry’.
Yu, H. B. (1998), ‘On the Diophantine equation American Mathematical Monthly, volume 87,
(x + 1)y − xz = 1’. American Mathematical
pages 161–175.
Monthly, volume 105, pages 656–657.
[p. 162. Lines 6–10.]
[p. 656. Last line.]
(x + 1)y1 − 1 (x + 1)y1 ) + 1 = xz
543

contents

wordlist

Accordingly, let
ˆ
f (ξ, η) =

f (x, y)ei(ξx+ηy) dx dy

be the Fourier transform of f . We shall need
ˆ
only two facts about f : it is continuous, and
ˆ
the correspondence between f and f is
ˆ
one-to-one. In particular, if f = 0 then f = 0
(almost everywhere).
259. (217)
Zander, V. (1972), ‘Fubini theorems for Orlicz
spaces of Lebesgue-Bochner measurable
functions’. Proceedings of the American
Mathematical Society, volume 32, pages

index

102–110.
[p. 102. Lines 1–2 of Abstract.]
Let (X, Y, υ) be the volume space formed as the
product of the volume spaces (Xi , Yi , υi )
(i = 1, 2).
260. (339, 425)
Zulli, L. (1996), ‘Charting the 3-sphere—an
exposition for undergraduates’. American
Mathematical Monthly, volume 103, pages
221–229.
[p. 227. Beginning of Section 5.]
Let us return for a moment to the circle
S 1 ⊆ C = R2 .

544

Index
a, 42
abstract algebra, 20
abstraction, 17
abuse of notation, 18
accumulation of attributes, 87
action, 37
ad-hoc polymorphism, 336
aﬃrming the consequent, 19
aha, 247
algebra, 20
algorithm, 21, 23, 201
algorithm addiction, 23
alias, 24, 201
alibi, 201
all, 26, 78, 462
always, 27
an, 42
analogy, 28
and, 30
angle bracket, 32
anonymous notation, 420
another planet, 34
antecedent, 225
antidiﬀerentiation, 556
any, 36, 462
APOS, 37
arbitrary, 38

argument, 39, 40, 198
argument by analogy, 28
arity, 41
article, 42
assertion, 43
assume, 264
assumption, 225
at most, 46
attitude, 23, 34, 204, 220, 268,
276, 286, 305, 333,
343, 477, 479, 487
attitudes, 47
back formation, 49
bad at math, 286
Bagchi, Atish, 13, 31, 51, 64,
114, 126, 147, 150,
156, 244, 266, 316,
319, 326, 341, 346,
366, 372, 397, 439
Baltutis, John S., 143
bar, 51
bare delimiter, 130
Barr, Marcia, 13, 18
Barr, Michael, 13, 22, 24, 31,
82, 88, 114, 149, 202,
211, 280, 287, 289,
545

301, 326, 382, 422,
451, 465, 483
barred arrow notation, 52, 197
be, 53
behavior, 19, 34, 83, 115, 133,
153, 167, 175, 189,
215, 247, 255, 278,
395, 400, 401, 435,
437, 487, 488
behaviors, 54
binary operation, 325
bind, 60
black box, 201
boldface, 57
both, 58
bound, 60
bound identiﬁer, 59
bound variable, 60
brace, 62
bracket, 63
Brown, Anne, 13
Brown, Laurinda, 13, 77
Browning, Christine, 13, 115
Buskes, Gerard, 13, 377
but, 64
calculate, 65
call, 66

contents
cardinality, 67
Cartesian power, 425
case, 68
cases, 69
cataphora, 112
cataphoric, 193
category, 70
category theory, 283, 288, 292,
301, 412
causality, 322
Chapman, Robin, 129
character, 71
characterization, 556
check, 72
Christiansen, Iben M., 13
circumﬂex, 73
citation, 12
classical category, 87
closed under, 74
code, 21
codomain, 76
cognitive dissonance, 77
collapsing, 129
collective plural, 78
college, 79
college algebra, 20
college mathematics, 79
colon equals, 80
combination, 81
comma, 82
comnputing science, 193

wordlist
compartmentalization, 83
componentwise, 109
compositional, 85
compute, 86
computer science, 22, 80, 104,
144, 172, 336, 404, 489
concept, 87
concept image, 296
conceptual, 90
conceptual blend, 92, 386
conditional assertion, 55, 94
conjunction, 96
connective, 97
consciousness-raising example,
165
consequent, 98
consider, 99
constructivism, 100
contain, 101
context, 102
context-dependent, 103
continuity, 157
contrapositive, 105
convention, 106
converse, 108
converse error, 19
coordinatewise, 109
copy, 110
coreference, 111
corollary, 113
counterexample, 114
546

index
covert curriculum, 115
crisp, 87
Cureton, Geddes, 13, 77
curly brackets, 62
dead metaphor, 298
deﬁned in, 117
deﬁned on, 117
deﬁned over, 117
deﬁniendum, 122
deﬁniens, 122
deﬁning equation, 199
deﬁning expression, 198
deﬁning phrase, 122
deﬁnite, 121
deﬁnite article, 120
deﬁnite description, 121
deﬁnition, 122, 126
deﬁnition by cases, 69
degenerate, 129
degree, 329
delimiter, 130
delimiting example, 164
delineated, 124, 131
denote, 132
denying the hypothesis, 133
dependency relation, 201
dependent variable notation,
134
descriptive, 12
descriptivist, 359

contents
determinate, 135
diagonal method, 556
dictionary deﬁnition, 126
discourse, 136
discourse analysis, 136
disjoint, 137
disjunction, 138
disjunctive deﬁnition, 69
display, 140
distinct, 141
distributive plural, 142
divide, 143
divisor, 143
domain, 144, 303
Dreyfus, Tommy, 13, 88
dummy variable, 60
each, 146
easy example, 164
element, 147, 216
elementary, 148
empty set, 150
encapsulation, 384
endowed, 156
enthymeme, 153
entiﬁcation, 384
Epp, Susanna, 13, 159, 423
equations, 155
equipped, 156
equivalence relation, 157, 204
equivalent, 158, 160

wordlist
establish notation, 161
eternal, 289, 322
eureka, 247
evaluate, 162
every, 462
example, 164
existential bigamy, 167
existential instantiation, 168
existential quantiﬁer, 169
expansive generalization, 206
explicit assertion, 172
expression, 431
extensional, 403
external representations, 386
extrapolate, 175
factor, 176
factorial, 103, 354, 358
fallacy, 177
false symmetry, 178
family, 179
family resemblance category,
87
Farmer, Jeﬀrey, 13, 88
Fibonacci, 421
ﬁeld, 180, 288
ﬁnd, 181
ﬁrst order, 148
ﬁrst order logic, 283
ﬁx, 183
follow, 184
547

index
following are equivalent, 185
formal, 188
formal analogy, 189
formal language, 190
formal logic, 283
formal proof, 188
formal proofs, 364
formula, 43, 192, 401
forward reference, 193
foundations, 204
fraktur, 194
free, 195
free identiﬁer, 59
free variable, 195
Freyd, Peter, 205
function, 197, 337, 421
function of n variables, 41
functional, 203
fundamentalist, 204
fuzzy, 87
GCD, 90
generalization, 206
generalization from examples,
206
generic, 287, 555
give, 209
given, 209
global identiﬁer, 211
global parameters, 212
globally, 271

contents
gothic, 213
grammar, 104
graph, 201, 202, 214
grasshopper, 215
greatest common divisor, 338
greatest integer, 334, 358
Greek alphabet, 216
grounding metaphors, 298
group, 298, 319, 330, 335, 382,
396, 406, 457, 467,
475, 483
grouping, 219, 338
guessing, 220
hand-waving, 556
hanging theorem, 221
hat, 73
hidden curriculum, 115
high school algebra, 20
hold, 224
how language changes, 246
hypothesis, 225
I, 226
i, 106
identiﬁer, 227
identify, 228
identity, 229
identity function, 229
if, 230
in deﬁnitions, 124

wordlist

index

interpolation, 557
if and only if, 231
interpretation, 251
iﬀ, 232
intuitionism, 557
illustration, 233
inventory examples, 165
image, 234
inverse, 253, 557
imaginary unit, 106, 227
inverse error, 133
implication, 94
isomorphic, 253
imply, 94, 424
isomorphism, 467
in general, 236
italics, 254
in other words, 237
in particular, 238
JSTOR, 12
in your own words, 239
jump the fence, 255
include, 240
just, 256
incomplete proof, 377
just in case, 257
indeﬁnite article, 241
juxtaposition, 258
indeﬁnite description, 243
inert, 289, 322
Kessel, Cathy, 13, 291
inﬁnite, 244
inﬁx notation, 245
labeled style, 259
inhabit, 556
Lakoﬀ, George, 296, 371, 377
inherit, 556
lambda notation, 197, 260
injective, 246
Lamport, Leslie, 13
inner product, 32, 358
larger, 261
input, 198
lathe, 488
insight, 247
Lawvere, William, 292
instantiate, 248
learned name, 307
integer, 249
left identity, 377
integral, 60, 130, 211, 250, 399, left Polish notation, 349
467
lemma, 262
integration, 556
lemmata, 263
intensional, 403
let, 264
interior, 298
leveling, 189
548

contents
lg, 273
light bulb mistake, 268
linear algebra, 20
literalist, 204
lives in, 557
ln, 273
local, 271
local identiﬁer, 197, 272
log, 338, 427, 556
logarithm, 273
logical signaler, 11
logician’s semantics, 288
look ahead, 274
lowercase, 68
Luddism, 276
malrule, 278
many-to-one coreference, 82
map, 201, 280
mapping, 280
marking, 124
matchﬁx notation, 334
mathedu mailing list, 14, 454
Mathematica, 41, 199, 249,
416, 431, 433
mathematical deﬁnition, 122
mathematical discourse, 281
mathematical education, 11,
47, 55, 100, 175, 278,
282, 289, 364, 432, 454

wordlist
mathematical logic, 283, 435,
450
mathematical mind, 286
mathematical object, 287
mathematical register, 10, 290,
450
mathematical structure, 292
mathematical vernacular, 291
McLarty, Colin, 149, 285
mean, 294
member, 147
mental representation, 296
metaphor, 298
misleading name, 317, 379
mnemonic, 301
model, 302
modern algebra, 20
module, 149
monster, 165
Moore, E. H., 141
motivating example, 164
multiple meanings, 20, 39, 70,
100, 101, 143, 144,
148, 158, 179, 180,
188, 198, 214, 229,
230, 234, 250, 261,
273, 280, 302, 303,
327, 329, 338, 342,
355, 360, 370, 378,
389, 391, 421, 425,
441, 451
549

index
multiset, 555
multivalued function, 377
must, 304
myths, 305
N, 306
name, 54, 197, 227, 307
namely, 308
naming a function by its value,
198
narrative style, 309
natural number, 310, 459
necessary, 311
negation, 312
never, 313
Newton’s Method, 21
normal reader, 215
not, 312
notation, 315
now, 316
number theory, 317
object, 37, 318
obtain, 319
one-to-one, 246
only if, 322
onto, 323
open sentence, 324, 463
operation, 325
operator, 326
or, 327

contents
or equivalently, 328
order, 329
order of quantiﬁers, 330
ordered pair, 41, 204, 412
orthogonal, 332
osmosis theory, 333
outﬁx notation, 334
output, 198
overloaded notation, 335
Oxford English Dictionary, 482
pairwise, 557
paradox, 557
parameter, 337
parametric polymorphism, 336
parenthesis, 338
parenthetic assertion, 339
partial function, 144
partition, 204
pathological, 87, 165
pattern recognition, 340
permutation, 342
Platonism, 343
plug into, 344
plural, 345
pointy brackets, 32
Polish notation, 349
polymorphic, 335
polynomial, 288
pons asinorum, 351
positive, 352

wordlist
postcondition, 353
postﬁx notation, 354
power, 355
precedence, 356
precondition, 122
predicate, 43, 357
preﬁx notation, 358
prescriptive, 12
prescriptivist, 359
prime, 360
process, 37, 384
program, 21
pronunciation, 363
proof, 364
proof by contradiction, 365
proof by instruction, 367
proper, 368
property, 369
proposition, 370
prototype, 371, 555
provided that, 372
put, 373
Q, 374
quantiﬁer, 375
quotient group, 406
R, 376
radial category, 377
radial concept, 377
range, 335, 378
550

index
ratchet eﬀect, 320
real, 379
real number, 379
recall, 380
reconstructive generalization,
206
reductionist, 204
redundant, 382
references needed, 55, 61, 112,
121, 243, 288, 333,
341, 343, 363, 393,
439, 487
register, 383
reiﬁcation, 384
relation, 385
relocator, 201
representation, 386
respectively, 388
result, 389
reverse Polish notation, 390
review, 391
revise, 391
rewrite using deﬁnitions, 392
right Polish notation, 390
ring, 143, 149, 288
root, 393
round parentheses, 338
rule, 197
sanity check, 395
satisfy, 396, 403

contents
say, 397
schema, 37
scientiﬁc register, 383
scope, 272, 399
Selden, Annie, 115
self-monitoring, 400
semantic contamination, 401
semantics, 403
sentence, 43
sequence, 555
set, 405, 406, 456
set comprehension, 407
setbuilder notation, 407
should, 11
show, 408
Siebenmann, Laurent, 167
sine, 107, 338, 340, 556
size, 557
snow, 409
some, 410
space, 411, 557
speciﬁc mathematical object,
287
speciﬁcation, 412
split deﬁnition, 69
square bracket, 414
standard interpretation, 416
state, 102
statement, 43
status, 418
Sterling, Leon, 13

wordlist

index

structural notation, 197, 420
structure, 292
student-professor problem, 55
subexpression, 431
subscript, 421
substitute, 422
substitution, 422
such that, 423
suﬃcient, 424
superscript, 425
suppose, 264
suppression of parameters, 427
surjective, 428
symbol, 227, 429
symbol manipulation, 436
symbolic assertion, 43
symbolic expression, 431
symbolic language, 433
symbolic logic, 283
symbolitis, 435
synecdoche, 437
syntax, 438
syntax-driven, 85
synthetic, 85

TFAE, 185
that is, 443
the, 42, 120
the following are equivalent,
185
then, 446
theorem, 447
there is, 169
Thomas, Owen, 13, 43, 159,
205, 236, 262, 266,
273, 441, 474
thus, 448
tilde, 449
topology, 144, 299
transformer, 201
translation problem, 30, 450
trial and error, 23
trigonometric functions, 451
trivial, 452
trivial example, 164
turf, 454
type, 456
type labeling, 457
typical, 371

Tall, David, 296
technical, 11
Tee, Gary, 13, 80, 216, 393
term, 441
term-by-term coreference, 388
text, 136

Uhl, Jerry, 13
unbounded, 244
under, 458
underlying set, 292, 382
understand, 555
uniform continuity, 157

551

unique, 459
unique up to isomorphism, 459
universal algebra, 20
universal generalization, 460
universal instantiation, 461
universal quantiﬁer, 114, 462
university, 79
unnecessarily weak assertion,
465
unwind, 466
up to, 467
uppercase, 68
pt

vacuous implication, 469
value, 198
vanish, 470
variable, 337, 471
variable clash, 472
variable mathematical object,
287, 288
variate, 473
variate identiﬁer, 473
vector space, 206
verify, 475
Vulcanism, 477
Vulcanize, 478

walking blindfolded, 479
well-deﬁned, 480
when, 482
where, 483
without loss of generality, 484
witness, 485
yes it’s weird, 487
you don’t know shriek, 488
Z, 489
zero, 393
Zhang, Guo Qiang, 13, 74, 183

Left To Do
Listed here are the entries in the Handbook where more information is needed, along with the
page number where each one begins.

Citations needed
ical logic”, “formal logic”, “symbolic logic”.

evaluate, p. 162: Use of “evaluate” meaning
give the value of a function.

mental representation, p. 296: Use of “intuitively” and “you can think of . . . ”.

existential quantiﬁer, p. 169: Use of “Some X
are Y ” when there is in fact only one X.

negation, p. 312: Uses of “Every X is not Y .”

function, p. 199: Use of fx for value of function.

never, p. 313: “Never” referring to behavior of
a function.

functional, p. 203: Use of the word “functional”.

now, p. 316: “Now” used to to point out a fact
that is already known or easily deduced and
that will be used in the next step of the proof.

in general, p. 236: Uses of “generally” and “in
general” with unambiguous meaning.
let, p. 266: Text ﬁtting the pattern “Let an
integer be even if it is divisible by 2” used by a
native English speaker.
local, p. 271: Informal and formal usage of
“local” and “global”.
local identiﬁer, p. 272: Explicit description of
scope, as in “Throughout this chapter f will be
a continuous function.”
mathematical logic, p. 283: Use of “mathemat-

orthogonal, p. 332: Use of “orthogonal” to
refer to a language or system of notation in
which constructions are freely substitutable.
positive, p. 352: “Positive” deﬁned to mean
greater than or equal to 0.
postcondition, p. 353: Postcondition not using
“where”.
proof by instruction, p. 367: Example of proof
instructing you to do something to a geometric
ﬁgure.

553

sum in a way that is analogous to “factor” for
products.

proof by instruction, p. 367: Example of instruction for producing a proof using symmetry, as in “interchange the role of x and y in
the preceding proof and you get a proof of . . .
”.

trivial, p. 452: References to a proof as “trivial”.

provided that, p. 372: Use of “providing that”.

trivial, p. 452: Citations for when a function is
called trivial.

show, p. 408: Use of “show”, particularly
discussions of what it means.

trivial, p. 453: Use of “trivial” to mean
nonzero or nonempty.

subscript, p. 421: Use of subscript to denote
partial derivative.

universal quantiﬁer, p. 462: Usage for universal quantiﬁer like “The multiples of 4 are
even.”

surjective, p. 428: Uses of “surjective” and
“onto” with and without mention of codomain.

verify, p. 475: Use of “veriﬁed” meaning it is
true in some instantiations.

symbolic expression, p. 432: English phrase
embedded in symbolic expression.

well-deﬁned, p. 481: Uses of “well-deﬁned”.

synecdoche, p. 437: Naming a mathematical
structure by its underlying set.

without loss of generality, p. 484: Uses of
“without loss of generality”.

synecdoche, p. 437: Naming an equivalence
class by a member of the class.

citations, p. 556: addition vs sum, subtraction vs diﬀerence, multiplication vs product,
squaring vs square, composition vs composite.

term, p. 441: Use of “term” as constituent of a

Information needed
This lists all occurrences of the phrases information needed and references needed.
behaviors, p. 55: Discussion of excluding
special cases in a generalization (e.g. square
among rectangles) in the mathematical
education literature. Also reference to high

school texts that say a square is not a rectangle.
bound variable, p. 61: References in math ed
literature to diﬃculties with bound variables.
coreference, p. 112: Linguistics consideration of
554

phrases such as “including all those with
synthesizers”.
deﬁnite description, p. 121: Discussion at
expository level of deﬁnite and indeﬁnite in
linguistics.
empty set, p. 150: Origin of symbol ∅ for
empty set.
indeﬁnite description, p. 243: Elementary
exposition of indeﬁnite descriptions in
linguistics.
mathematical object, p. 288: Have logicians
ever explicated the notion of “variable object”
as the set of all possible interpreations of the
axioms for that kind of object?
order of quantiﬁers, p. 330: Linguistics
literature about phrases such as “There is a
perfect gift for every child” and its relationship
if any to distributive plurals.
osmosis theory, p. 333: Letter to editor in
Notices saying we should not have to teach
students to understand the way mathematics is
written, or the ﬁner points of logic (for example
how quantiﬁers are negated). They should be

able to ﬁgure these things on their own.
pattern recognition, p. 341: References in math
ed literature to pattern recognition, e.g. in
substituting and in rules such as the chain rule.
Platonism, p. 343: Studies by linguists of the
way mathematicians write about mathematical
objects, in particular their use with articles (in
contrast to concepts such as gravity).
pronunciation, p. 363: Math ed literature on
need some student have of being able to
pronounce a mathematical expression if they
are going to read it.
root, p. 393: Statement that “root of a
function” is incorrect.
syntax, p. 439: Math ed literature on students’
use of syntax to decode mathematical
expressions.
unnecessarily weak assertion, p. 465: Math ed
literature about walking blindfolded.
yes it’s weird, p. 487: Studies in math ed
literature about value of explicitly recognizing
students’ sources of discomfort.

TeX Problems
1. (Hypertext version) If a link is broken across a line the second part does not work as a link.
2. (Hypertext version) The List of Words and Phrases is alphabetized incorrectly. In
particular, if w is the ﬁrst word in x, then w comes after x. For example, phrases beginning
with “formal” come before the word “formal”. I can probably ﬁx this on the ﬁnal run by
555

3.
4.
5.

6.
7.

using Mathematica.
(Both versions) The string “pt” appears at the end of the Index; I have not been able to
ﬁnd out why.
(Both versions) Last page of index has no header.
(Paper version) In the bibliography, backreferences are to the page number. I have
experimented with having the backreference refer to the entry it appears in, but the
superscript always appears as “???” and generates an error message. I have not been able
to make this work correctly.
(Paper version) Backreferences break after the parenthesis sometimes.
(Both versions) The spacing is funny before and after bibliographic citations. Also,
sometimes they cause a line break after a parenthesis.

Things To Do
1. List of commonly mispronounced names such as “Riemann”? Make a table of symbols and
names, together with how they are pronounced?
2. Talk about tuples, lists, sequences, multisets.
3. Entry for generic. This is a word with mathematical deﬁnitions that is also used informally.
Generic in its nontechnical meaning may be same as prototype.
4. Talk about variable as role, as in [Lakoﬀ and N´nez, 1997] . (Fundamental metonymy of
u˜
algebra). Maybe “variable” should be a separate article.
5. Change “semantic contamination” to “metaphorical contamination” and include (some or
all of) the “Diﬃculties” discussion now under metaphor.
6. Talk about the number zero (zero meaning root is already included). Use Chapter 3 of
[Lakoﬀ and N´nez, 1997] .
u˜
7. “Understand”. Reference Sfard.
8. Attitudes: On some subjects, everyone thinks they are experts: “anyone can write”,
“anyone can program”, etc. On others, few do (mathematics).

556

9. Mental representation may be incoherent (Tall and Vinner). Example of radial category in
the sense of [Lakoﬀ, 1986] ?
10. Put a separate entry for every concept that is deﬁned elsewhere than under its own name.
Thus converse error is deﬁned under aﬃrming the consequent, so there should be an entry
converse error that says “See aﬃrming the consequent”. Some of these have been done.
11. Find more citations from distinct sources so that no one publication has more than one
quote from it. This should make it possible to publish the citations with the book (perhaps
in the CD-Rom version but not the printed version) without having to get copyright
permissions. Right now only a few sources, mostly textbooks, have more than two citations.
12. Entry for composition of functions, tied to entry for function. Talk about order of
composition, connection with writing functions on right or left, use of semicolon in c.s.
13. Separate entry for value, which is now under “function”, including some things said under
function. Talk about x goes to y under f , x becomes y, you get y etc. Distinguish value of a
function from value of a variable. Some functions have one name for the function, another
for the value:
function
result, value
addition
sum
subtraction
diﬀerence
multiplication product
squaring
square
composition
composite
Other functions such as sin, log, etc. don’t make this distinction. Many writers do not make
the distinction with “composition”. Citations needed.
14. Deﬁnitions of these words. But in many cases I may decide not to include them.
a) a little thought

f) induction

b) characterization

g) inhabits

c) diagonal method

h) inherit

d) hand-waving

i) integration (antidiﬀerentiation), maybe
under pattern recognition

e) hence
557

j)
k)
l)
m)
n)
o)
p)

q)
r)
s)
t)

pairwise
paradox
size,
space (various meanings, related by
common metaphor)
u) telegraphic style as in [Bagchi and
Wells, 1998b] .

interpolation
intuitionism
intuitively, intuition
inverse
lives in,
nothing but
ordinal

558

